MAZEPPA
1.
’Twas after dread Pultowa’s day,6
When Fortune left the royal Swede 7 –
Around a slaughtered army lay,
No more to combat and to bleed.
The Power and Glory of the war, 5
Faithless as their vain votaries, Men,
Had passed to the triumphant Czar, 8
And Moscow’s walls were safe again –
Until a day more dark and drear,
And a more memorable year, 9 10
Should give to slaughter and to shame
A mightier host and haughtier name –
A greater wreck – a deeper fall,
A shock to One – a thunderbolt to all.10 –
2.
Such was the hazard of the die; 11 15
The wounded Charles was taught to fly 12 –
By day and night, through field and flood,
Stained with his own and subjects’ blood –
For thousands fell that flight to aid,
And not a voice was heard t’upbraid 20
Ambition in his humbled hour,
When Truth had naught to dread from Power.
His horse was slain, and Gieta gave
His own; and died the Russians’ slave. 14
This too sinks after many a league15 25
Of well-sustained but vain fatigue –
And in the depths of forests’ darkling –
The watchfires in the distance sparkling –
The beacons of surrounding foes –
A King must lay his limbs at length. 30
Are these the laurels and repose
For which the Nations strain their strength? –
They laid him by a savage tree 16
In outworn Nature’s agony;
His wounds were stiff – his limbs were stark – 35
The heavy hour was chill and dark;
The fever in his blood forbade
A transient slumber’s fitful aid,
And thus it was – but yet through all,
Kinglike the monarch bore his fall, 40
And made in this extreme of ill
His pangs the vassals of his will 17 –
All silent and subdued were they,
As once the Nations round him lay. –

3.
A band of chiefs – alas! how few 45
Since but the fleeting of a day
Had thinned it – but this wreck was true,
And chivalrous; upon the clay
Each sate him down all sad and mute
Beside his monarch and his steed – 50
For danger levels man and brute,18
And all are fellows in their need.
Among the rest Mazeppa19 made
His pillow in an old Oak’s shade,
Himself as rough and scarce less old – 55
The Ukraine’s Hetman, calm and bold.
But first, outspent with this long course,
The Cossack Prince rubbed down his horse,
And made for him a leafy bed,
And smoothed his fetlocks and his mane, 60
And slacked his girth, and stripped his rein,
And joyed to hear how well he fed;
For until now he had the dread
His wearied courser might refuse
To browse beneath the midnight dews; 65
But he was hardy as his lord,
And little cared for bed and board –
But spirited and docile too,
Whate’er was to be done, would do,
Shaggy and swift – and strong of limb – 70
All Tartar-like he carried him,
Obeyed his voice, and came to call,
And knew him in the midst of all,
Though thousands were around, and Night,
Without a star, pursued her flight; 75
That Steed from Sunset until dawn
His chief would follow like a fawn. –
4.
This done, Mazeppa spread his cloak,
And laid his lance beneath his oak –
Felt if his arms in order good 80
The long day’s march had well withstood –
If still the powder filled the pan,
And flints unloosened kept their lock;
His sabre’s hilt and scabbard felt,
And whether they had chafed his belt; 85
And next the venerable man
From out his haversack and can
Prepared and spread his slender stock,

And to the monarch and his men
The whole or portion offered then – 90
With far less of inquietude
Than courtiers at a banquet would.
And Charles of this his slender share
With smiles partook a moment there, 20
To force of cheer a greater show, 95
And seem above both wounds and woe. –
And then he said – “Of all our band,
Though firm of heart and strong of hand
In skirmish, march, or forage, none
Can less have said or more have done, 100
Than thee, Mazeppa – on the earth
So fit a pair had never birth,
Since Alexander’s days till now,
As thy Bucephalus and thou.21
All Scythia’s fame to thine should yield 105
For pricking on o’er flood and field.”
Mazeppa answered – “Ill betide
“The school wherein I learned to ride.” –
Quoth Charles – “Old Hetman, wherefore so,
Since thou hast learned the art so well?” 110
Mazeppa said – “’Twere long to tell,
And we have many leagues to go,
With every now and then a blow,
And ten to one at least the foe,
Before our steeds may graze at ease 115
Before the swift Borysthenes 22 –
And, Sire, your limbs have need of rest,
And I will be the Sentinel
Of this your troop.” – “But I request,”
Said Sweden’s monarch – “thou wilt tell 120
This tale of thine, and I may reap
Perchance from this the boon of sleep23 –
For at this moment from mine eyes
The present hope of Slumber flies.” 24 –
“Well, Sire, with such a hope, I’ll track 125
My seventy years of memory back.
I think ’twas in my twentieth spring –
Aye, ’twas, when Casimir was king 25 –
ohn Casimir – I was his page
Six summers in my earlier age; 130
A learned monarch, faith, was he –
And most unlike your Majesty –
He made no wars, and did not gain
New realms to have them back again –
And (save debates in Warsaw’s Diet) 135
He reigned in most unseemly quiet. –
Not that he had no cares to vex –
He loved the Muses and the Sex,
And sometimes these so froward are,
They made him wish himself at war; 140
But soon, his wrath being o’er, he took
Another mistress – or new book;
And then he gave prodigious fêtes –
All Warsaw gathered round his gates
To gaze upon his splendid court, 145
And dames and chiefs of princely port;
He was the Polish Solomon –
So sung his poets – all but one –
Who, being unpensioned, made a satire,
And boasted that he could not flatter. 150
It was a court of jousts and mimes,
Where every courtier tried at rhymes;
Even I for once produced some verses,
And signed my odes “Despairing Thyrsis”. 26 –
There was a certain Palatine, 27 155
A Count of high and far descent,
Rich as a Salt or silver mine; *
And he was proud, ye may divine,
As if from heaven he had been sent;
He had such wealth in blood and ore 160
As few could match beneath the throne –
And he would gaze upon his store,
And o’er his pedigree would pore,
Until, by some confusion led,
Which almost looked like want of head, 165
He thought their merits were his own. – –
His wife was not of his opinion;
His junior she by thirty years, 28
Grew daily tired of his dominion,
And after wishes, hopes, and fears, 170
To Virtue a few farewell tears,
A restless dream or two, some glances
At Warsaw’s youth, some songs, and dances –
Awaited but the usual chances,
Those happy accidents which render 175
The coldest dames so very tender. –
To deck her Count with titles given,
’Tis said, as passports into heaven;29
But, strange to say, they rarely boast
Of these who have deserved them most. 180
5.
“I was a goodly stripling then –
At seventy years I so may say
That there were few, or boys or men,
Who in my dawning time of day,
Of vassal or of knight’s degree, 185
Could vie in vanities with me;
For I had strength, youth, gaiety –
A port not like to this ye see,
But smooth, as all is rugged now;
For time, and war, and care have ploughed 190
My very soul from out my brow;
And thus I should be disavowed
By all my kind and kin, could they
Compare my day and yesterday;
This change was wrought, too, long e’er Age 195
Had ta’en my features for his page. –
With years, ye know, have not declined
My strength, my courage, or my mind,
Or at this hour I should not be
Telling old tales beneath a tree, 200
With starless skies my canopy. –
But let me on – Theresa’s31 form –
Methinks it glides before me now,
Between me and yon chestnut’s bough;
The memory is so quick and warm, 205
And yet I find no words to tell
The Shape of her I loved so well.
She had the Asiatic eye, 
Such as our Turkish Neighbourhood
Hath mingled with our Polish blood, 210
Dark as above us is the sky –
But through it stole a tender light
Like the first Moonrise at Midnight –
Large, dark, and swimming in the stream
Which seemed to melt to its own beam – 215
All love, half languor, and half fire,33
Like Saints that at the Stake expire34 –
And lift their raptured looks on high
As though it were a joy to die.
A brow like a Midsummer lake, 220
Transparent with the Sun therein,
When waves no murmur dare to make,
And Heaven beholds her face within –
A cheek and lip – but why proceed? –
I loved her then – I love her still – 225
And such as I am love indeed
In fierce extremes – in good and ill.35
But still we love even in our rage,
And haunted to our very age
With the vain shadow of the past – 230
As is Mazeppa to the last. –
6.
“We met, we gazed, I saw and sighed –
She did not speak, and yet replied –
There are ten thousand tones and signs
We hear and see, but none defines – 235
Involuntary sparks of thought
Which strike from out the heart o’erwrought,
And form a strange intelligence,
Alike mysterious and intense,
Which link the burning chain that binds, 240
Without their will, young hearts and minds,
Conveying, as the electric wire,
We know not how, the absorbing fire. –
I saw and sighed – in silence wept –
And still reluctant distance kept, 245
Until I was made known to her,
And we might then and there confer
Without suspicion – then, even then,
I longed, and was resolved to speak,
But on my lips they died again, 250
The accents tremulous and weak36 –
Until one hour. There is a Game,
A frivolous and foolish play,37
Wherewith we wile away the day –
It is – I have forgot the name – 255
And we to this, it seems, were set,
By some strange chance which I forget;
I recked not if I won or lost;
It was enough for me to be
So near to hear, and oh! to see 260
The being whom I loved the most. –
I watched her as a Sentinel
(May ours this dark night watch as well!)
Until I saw, and thus it was,
That she was pensive, nor perceived 265
Her occupation, nor was grieved
Nor glad to lose or gain, but still
Played on for hours, as if her will
Yet bound her to the place, though not
That hers might be the winning lot; 270
Then through my brain the thought did pass,
Even as a flash of lightning there,
That there was Something in her air
Which would not doom me to despair –
But on the thought my words broke forth, 275
All incoherent as they were –
Their eloquence was little worth,
But yet she listened – ’tis enough;
Who listens once will listen twice;
Her heart, be sure, is not of ice, 280
And one refusal no rebuff.
7.
“I loved, and was beloved again;
They tell me, Sire, you never knew
Those gentle frailties – if ’tis true,38
I shorten all my joy or pain; 285
To you ’twould seem absurd as vain;
But all men are not born to reign,
Or o’er their passions, or as you,
Thus o’er themselves and nations too.
I am – or rather was – a Prince, 290
A Chief of thousands, and could lead
Them on where each would foremost bleed,
But could not o’er myself evince
The like controul; but to resume – 295
I loved, and was beloved again;
In sooth – it is a happy doom,
But yet, where happiest, ends in pain. – *
We met in secret, and the hour
Which led me to that Lady’s bower
Was fiery Expectation’s dower. 300
My days and nights were nothing – all
Except that hour, which doth recall,
In the long lapse from youth to age,
No other like itself – I’d give
The Ukraine back again to live 305
It o’er once more, and be a Page,
The happy Page who was the Lord
Of one soft heart and his own Sword,
And had no other gem nor wealth
Save nature’s gift of youth and health; 310
We met in secret – doubly sweet,
Some say, they find it so to meet;
I know not that – I would have given
My life but to have called her mine
In the full view of earth and heaven, 315
For I did oft and long repine
That we could only meet by stealth. –
8.
“For lovers there are many eyes,
And such there were on us; the Devil
On such occasions should be civil – 320
The Devil – I’m loathe to do him wrong –
It might be some untoward Saint,
Who would not be at rest too long,
But to his pious bile gave vent –
But one fair night, some lurking spies 325
Surprized and seized us both. –
The Count was something more than wroth –
I was unarmed; but if in steel,

All cap-à-pé from head to heel, 39
What ’gainst their numbers could I do? 330
’Twas near his castle, far away
From city or from succour near,40
And almost on the break of day;
I did not think to see another –
My moments seemed reduced to few, 335
And with one prayer to Mary Mother,
And, it may be, a Saint or two,
As I resigned me to my fate –
They led me to the Castle Gate;
Theresa’s doom I never knew – 340
Our lot was henceforth separate. –
An angry man, ye may opine,
Was he, the proud Count Palatine,
And he had reason good to be;
But he was most enraged lest such 345
An accident should chance to touch
Upon his future Pedigree;
Nor less amazed, that such a blot
His noble Scutcheon should have got,
While he was highest of his line; 350
Because unto himself he seemed
The first of men, nor less, he deemed,
In others’ eyes, and most in mine. –
’Sdeath! with a Page! – perchance a King
Had reconciled him to the thing – 355
But with a stripling of a Page –
I felt, but cannot paint, his rage. –
9.
“‘Bring forth the horse!’ The horse was brought;
In truth, he was a noble Steed,
A Tartar of the Ukraine breed, 360
Who looked as though the Speed of thought
Were in his limbs – but he was wild,
Wild as the wild-deer, and untaught,
With spur and bridle undefiled;41
’Twas but a day he had been caught, 365
And snorting with erected mane
And strugging fiercely but in vain,
In the full foam of wrath and dread,
To me the Desart-born was led. –
They bound me on, that menial throng, 370
Upon his back with many a thong,
Then loosed him with a sudden lash –
Away! – Away! – and on we dash! –
Torrents less rapid and less rash.
10.
“Away! – Away! – my breath was gone – 375
I saw not where he hurried on –
’Twas scarcely yet the break of day,
And on he foamed – Away – Away! –
The last of human sounds which rose
As I was darted from my foes 380
Was the wild shout of savage laughter,
Which on the wind came roaring after,
A moment from that rabble-rout;
With sudden wrath I wrenched my head,
And snapped the cord which to the mane 385
Had bound my neck in lieu of rein,
And, writhing half my form about,
Howled back my curse; but ’midst the tread,
The thunder of my courser’s speed,
Perchance they did not hear nor heed, 390
It vexes me – for I would fain
Have paid their insult back again;
I paid it well in after days –
There is not of that castle gate, 395
Its drawbridge and portcullis weight, 42
Stone, bar, moat, bridge, or barrier left,
Nor of its fields a blade of grass,
Save what grows on a ridge of wall
Where stood the hearth-stone of the hall;43
And many a time ye there might pass 400
Nor dream that e’er that fortress was.
I saw its turrets in a blaze44 –
Their crackling battlements all cleft –
And the hot lead pour down like rain
From off the scorched and blackening roof, 495
Whose thickness was not vengeance-proof.
They little thought, that day of pain,
When launched, as on the lightning’s flash,
They bade me to destruction dash,
That one day I should come again, 410
With twice five thousand horse, to thank
The Count for his uncourteous ride.
They played me there a bitter prank
When, with the wild horse for my guide,
They bound me to his foaming flank; 415
At length I played them one as frank –
For Time at last sets all things even,
And if we do but watch the hour,
There never yet was human power
Which could evade, if unforgiven, 420
The patient search – and vigil long –
Of him who treasures up a wrong. –
11.
“Away! Away! my steed and I,
Upon the pinions of the wind,
All human dwellings left behind; 425
We sped like meteors through the sky,
When with its crackling sound the Night
Is chequered with the Northern light45 –
Town – village – none were on our track,
But a wild plain of far extent, 430
And bounded by a forest black
And, save the scarce-seen battlement
On distant heights of some stronghold
Against the Tartars built of old,
No trace of man – the year before 435
A Turkish army had marched o’er,
And where the Spahi’s hoof hath trod
The Verdure flies the bloody sod.46
The sky was dull, and dim, and grey,
And a low breeze crept moaning by 440
I could have answered with a sigh,
But fast we fled – Away! Away! –
And I could neither sigh nor pray,
And my cold sweat-drops fell like rain
Upon the courser’s bristling mane; 445
But, snorting still with rage and fear,
He flew upon his far career.
At times I almost thought, indeed,
He must have slackened in his speed –
But no – my bound and slender frame 450
Was nothing to his angry Might,
And merely like a spur became.
Each motion which I made to free
My swoln limbs from their agony
Increased his fury and affright; 455
I tried my voice – ’twas faint and low,
But yet he swerved as from a blow;
And, starting to each accent, sprang
As from a sudden trumpet’s Clang;
Meantime my cords were wet with gore, 460
Which oozing through my limbs ran o’er;
And in my tongue the thirst became
A something fierier far than flame. –
12.
“We neared the wild wood; ’twas so wide,
I saw no bounds on either side; 465
’Twas studded with old sturdy trees,
That bent not to the roughest breeze
Which howls down from Siberia’s waste,
And strips the forest in its haste –
But these were few and far between, 470
Set thick with shrubs more young and green,
Luxuriant with their annual leaves,
Ere Strown by those autumnal Eves
That nip the forest foliage dead,
Discoloured with a lifeless red 475
Which stands thereon like stiffened gore
Upon the slain when battle’s o’er –
And some long Winter’s night hath shed
Its frost o’er every tombless head,
So cold and stark, the Raven’s beak 480
May peck, unpierced each frozen cheek:
’Twas a wild waste of Underwood,
And here and there the Chestnut stood,
The strong Oak, and the hardy Pine –
But far apart – and well it were, 485
Or else a different lot were mine;
The boughs gave way, and did not tear
My limbs; and I found strength to bear
My wounds, already seared with cold;
My bonds forbade to loose my hold; 490
We rustled through the leaves like wind –
Left shrubs, and trees, and wolves behind –
By night I heard them on the track –
Their troop came hard upon our back
With their long gallop, which can tire 495
The hound’s deep hate, and Hunter’s fire;
Where’er we flew they followed on,
Nor left us with the morning Sun;
Behind I saw them, scarce a rood,
At day-break winding through the wood, 500
And through the night had heard their feet
Their stealing, rustling step repeat –
Oh! how I wished for spear or sword,
At least to die amidst the horde
And perish, if it must be so, 505
At bay, destroying many a foe!
When first my courser’s race begun,
I wished the goal already won –
But now I doubted Strength and Speed –
Vain doubt! his swift and Savage breed 510
Had nerved him like the mountain roe;
Nor faster falls the blinding Snow
Which whelms the peasant near the door
Whose threshold he shall cross no more,
Bewildered with the dazzling blast, 515
Than through the forest paths he past –
Untired – untamed – and worse than wild,
All furious as a favoured child
Balked of its wish, or, fiercer still,
A Woman piqued, who has her will. 47 – 520
13.
The wood was past – ’twas more than Noon,
But chill the air, although in June;
Or it might be my veins ran cold –
Prolonged Endurance tames the bold,
And I was then, not what I seem, 525
But headlong as a wintry stream,
And wore my feelings out before
I well could count their causes o’er;
And what with fury, fear, and wrath,
The tortures which beset my path, 530
Cold, hunger, Sorrow, shame, distress,
Thus bound in Nature’s nakedness –
Sprung from a race whose rising blood,
When stirred beyond its calmer mood,
And trodden hard upon, is like 535
The rattle-Snake’s in act to strike –
What marvel if this outworn trunk
Beneath its woes a moment sunk?
The earth gave way, the skies rolled round,
I seemed to sink upon the ground, 540
But erred, for I was fastly bound.
My heart turned sick – my brains grew sore,
And throbbed awhile, then beat no more –
The Skies spun like a mighty wheel;
I saw the trees like drunkards reel, 545
And a slight flash sprang o’er my eyes,
Which saw no farther – he who dies
Can die no more than then I died,48
O’ertortured by that ghastly ride.49
I felt the blackness come and go, 550
And strove to wake, but could not make
My senses climb up from below;
I felt as on a plank at sea,
When all the waves that dash o’er thee
At the same time upheave and whelm 555
And hurl thee towards a desart realm; 50
My undulating life was as
The fancied lights that flitting pass
Our shut eyes in deep Midnight – when
Fever begins upon the brain. 560
But soon it passed, with little pain,
But a confusion worse than such –
I own that I should deem it much
Dying to feel the same again,
And yet I do suppose we must 565
Feel far more ere we turn to dust;
No matter – I have bared my brow
Full in death’s face – before, and now.
14.
“My thoughts came back – where was I? – cold,
And numb, and giddy – pulse by pulse 570
Life reassumed its lingering hold,
And throb by throb, till grown a pang,
Which for a moment would convulse,
My blood reflowed, though thick and chill;
My ear with uncouth noises rang – 575
My heart began once more to thrill –
My Sight returned, though dim, alas!
And thickened as it were with Glass;
Methought the dash of waves was nigh –
There was a gleam too of the sky, 580
Studded with stars – it is no dream –
The Wild Horse swims the wilder stream!
The bright broad river’s gushing tide
Sweeps winding onward far and wide,
And we are halfway struggling o’er 585
To yon unknown and silent shore –
The waters broke my hollow trance,
And with a temporary strength
My stiffened limbs were rebaptized51 –
My Courser’s broad breast proudly braves 590
And dashes off the ascending waves
And onward we advance!
We reach the slippery shore at length –
A haven I but little prized,
For all behind was dark and drear, 595
And all before us Night and fear.
How many hours of night or day
In those suspended pangs I lay
I could not tell; I scarcely knew52
If this were human breath I drew. – 600
15.
“With glossy skin, and dripping mane,
And reeling limb, and reeking flank,
The wild steed’s sinewy nerves still strain
Up the repelling bank.53 –
We gain the top – a boundless plain 605
Spreads through the shadow of the night,
And onward, onward, onward seems,
Like precipices in our dreams,
To stretch beyond the sight;
And here and there a speck of white, 610
Or scattered spot of dusky Green,
In masses broke into the light,
As rose the Moon upon my right,54
But nought distinctly seen
In the dim waste would indicate 615
The omen of a cottage gate;
No twinkling taper from afar –
Stood like a hospitable Star –
Not even an ignis fatuus rose
To make him merry with my Woes55 – 620
That very cheat had cheered me then,
Although detected, welcome still,
Reminding me, through every ill,
Of the abodes of men: –
16.
“Onward we went, but slack and slow; 625
His savage force at length o’erspent,
The drooping courser faint and low
All feebly foaming went –
A sickly infant had had power
To guide him forward in that hour – 630
But useless all to me,
His new born tameness nought availed –
My limbs were bound – my force had failed,
Perchance, had they been free:
With feeble effort still I tried 635
To rend the bonds so starkly tied,
But still it was in vain –
My limbs were only wrung the more,
And soon the idle strife gave o’er,
Which but prolonged their pain. 640
The dizzy race seemed almost done,
Although no Goal was nearly won;
Some streaks announced the Coming Sun –
How slow, alas, he came!
Methought that mist of dawning grey 645
Would never dapple into day –
How heavily it rolled away
Before the Eastern flame
Rose crimson, and deposed the Stars,
And called the radiance from their Cars, 650
And filled the Earth deep from his throne
With lonely lustre all his own.
17.
“Up rose the Sun; the Mists were curled
Back from the solitary world,56
Which lay around, behind, before – 655
What booted it to traverse o’er
Plain, forest, river? Man nor brute,
Nor dint of hoof, nor print of foot,
Lay in the wild luxuriant soil;
No sign of travel – none of toil – 660
The very air was mute,
And not an Insect’s shrill small horn,57
Nor matin bird’s new voice was borne
From herb nor thicket; many a verst,58
Panting as if his heart would burst, 665
The weary brute still staggered on,
And still we were, or seemed, alone.
At length, while reeling on our way,
Methought I heard a courser neigh
From out yon tuft of blackening firs; 670
Is it the wind those branches stirs? –
No – no – from out the forest prance
A trampling troop. I see them come –
In one vast squadron they advance –
I strove to cry – my lips were dumb 59 – 675
The steeds rush on in plunging pride,
But where are they the reins to guide?
A thousand horse and none to ride! –
With flowing tail, and flying mane,
Wide nostrils never stretched by pain, 680
Mouths bloodless to the bit or rein,
And feet that iron never shod,
And flanks unscarred by spur or rod –
A thousand horse – the wild – the free,
Like Waves that follow o’er the Sea 685
Came thickly thundering on,
As if our faint approach to meet.
The sight re-nerved my courser’s feet –
A moment staggering, feebly fleet,
A moment with a faint low neigh 690
He answered, and then fell;
With gasps and glazing eyes he lay,
And reeking limbs immoveable –
His first and last career is done!
On came the troop – they saw him stoop – 695
They saw me strangely bound along
His back with many a bloody thong –
They stop – they start – they snuff the air –
Gallop a moment here and there –
Approach, retire, wheel round and round, 700
Then plunging back with sudden bound,
Headed by one black mighty Steed,
Who seemed the Patriarch of his breed,60
Without a single speck or hair
Of white upon his shaggy hide; – 705
They snort – they foam – neigh – swerve aside,
And backward to the forest fly
By instinct from a human eye.61 – – –
They left me there, to my despair, 62
Linked to the dead and stiffening wretch 710
Whose lifeless limbs beneath me stretch,
Relieved from that unwonted weight
From whence I could not extricate
Nor him nor me – and there we lay,
The dying on the dead; 715
I little deemed another day
Would see my houseless, helpless head. 63 – –
And there from Noon till Twilight bound
I felt the heavy hours toil round,
With just enough of life to see 720
My last of Suns go down on me,
In hopeless certainty of mind
That makes us feel at length resigned
To that which our foreboding Years
Presents the worst and last of fears 725
Inevitable, even a boon,
Nor more unkind for coming soon,
Yet shunned and dreaded with such care,
As if it only were a snare
That Prudence might escape: 730
At times both wished-for and implored;
At times sought with self-pointed sword,
Yet a still dark and hideous Close
To even intolerable woes,
And welcome in no shape. 735
And, strange to say, the Sons of pleasure –
They who have revelled beyond measure
In Beauty, Wassail, Wine and Treasure –
Die calm, or calmer, oft, than he
Whose Heritage was Misery; 740
For he who hath in turn run through
All that was beautiful and new
Hath nought to hope, and nought to leave,
And save the future (which is viewed
Not quite as men are base or good, 745
But as their nerves may be endued)
With nought perhaps to grieve. –
The Wretch still hopes his woes must end,
And Death, whom he should deem his friend,
Appears to his distempered eyes 750
Arrived to rob him of his prize,
The tree of his new Paradise. – –
Tomorrow would have given him all,
Repaid his pangs – repaired his fall –
Tomorrow would have been the first 755
Of days no more deplored and curst,
But bright, and long, and beckoning years
Seen dazzling through the mist of tears,
Guerdon of many a painful hour;
Tomorrow would have given him power – 760
To rule – to shine – to smite – to save –
And must it dawn upon his Grave? –
18.
“The Sun was sinking. Still I lay,
Chained to the chill and stiffening steed;
I thought to mingle there our clay, 765
And my dim eyes of death had need –
No hope arose of being freed.
I cast my last looks up the sky,
And there between me and the Sun64
I saw the expecting Raven fly, 770
Who scarce would wait till both should die
Ere his repast begun.
He flew – and perched – then flew once more,
But each time nearer than before;
I saw his wing through twilight flit, 775
And once so near me he alit
I could have smote, but lacked the strength –
But the slight motion of my hand,
And feeble scratching of the sand –
My exerted throat’s faint struggling noise – 780
Which scarcely could be called a voice –
Together scared him off at length.
I know no more – my latest dream
Is something of a lovely star
Which fixed my dull eyes from afar, 785
And went and came with wandering beam;
And of the cold, dull, swimming, dense
Sensation of recurring Sense,
And then subsiding back to death,
And then again a little breath – 790
A little thrill – a short suspense –
An icy sickness curdling o’er
My heart, and sparks that crossed my brain –
A gasp – a throb – a start of pain –
A sigh, and nothing more. 795
19.65
“I woke – where was I? – do I see
A human face look down on me?
And doth a roof above me close?
Do these limbs on a couch repose?
Is this a chamber where I lie, 800
And is it mortal, yon bright eye,
That watches me with gentle glance?
I closed my eyes again once more,
As doubtful that their former trance
Could not as yet be o’er. 805
A slender Girl, long-haired and tall,
Sate watching by the cottage wall;
The Sparkle of her eye I caught
Even with my first return of thought,
For ever and anon she threw 810
A pitying, prying, glance on me
With her black eyes so wild and free;
I gazed and gazed – until I knew
No vision it could be,66
But that I lived, and was released 815
From adding to the Vulture’s feast.67 –
And when the Cossack Maid beheld
My heavy eyes at length unsealed,
She smiled – and I essayed to speak,
But failed – and she approached, and made 820
With lip and finger, Signs that said
I must not strive as yet to break
The silence, till my strength should be
Enough to leave my accents free;
And then her hand on mine she laid, 825
And smoothed the pillow for my head,
And stole along on tiptoe tread,
And gently oped the door, and spoke
In whispers – ne’er was voice so sweet!
Even Music followed her light feet.68 830
But those she called had not awoke,
And she went forth, but e’er she passed,
Another look on me she cast,
Another sign she made, to say
That I had naught to fear, that all 835
Were near at my command, or call,
And she would not delay
Her due return: – while she was gone,
Methought I felt too much alone.
20.
“She came with Mother and with Sire69 – 840
What need of more? I will not tire
With long recital of the rest,
Since I became the Cossack’s guest –
They found me senseless on the plain,
They bore me to the nearest hut, 845
They brought me into life again –
Me – one day o’er their realm to reign. –
Thus the vain fool who strove to glut
His rage, refining on my pain,
Sent me forth to the Wilderness 850
Bound, naked, bleeding, and alone
To pass the desart to a throne –
What Mortal his own doom may guess?
Let none despond – let none despair –
Tomorrow the Borysthenes 855
May see our coursers graze at ease
Upon his Turkish banks, and never
Had I such welcome for a river
As I shall yield when safely there –
Comrades – Good Night!” – the Hetman threw 860
His length beneath the oak-tree shade
With leafy couch already made,
A bed nor comfortless nor new
To him, who took his rest whene’er
The hour arrived, no matter where; 865
His eyes the hastening slumbers steep –
And if ye marvel Charles forgot
To thank his tale, he wondered not –
The King had been an hour asleep.

THfc

PROPHECY OF DANTE.

CANTO I.

ONCE more in man's frail world ! which I had left So long that 'twas forgotten ; and I feel The weight of clay again,— too soon bereft

Of the immortal vision which could heal My earthly sorrows, and to God's Own skies Lift me from that deep gulf without repeal,

Where late my ears rung with the damned cries Of souls in hopeless bale ; and from that place Of lesser torment, whence men may arise

Pure from the fire to join the angelic race; 10 Midst whom my own bright Beatrice bless'd (1) My spirit with her light ; and to the base

Of the Eternal Triad ! first, last, best,

Mysterious, three, sole, infinite, great God ! Soul universal ! led the mortal guest,

Unblasted by the glory, though he trod

From star to star to reach the almighty throne. Oh Beatrice ! whose sweet limbs the sod

So long hath prest, and the cold marble stone, Thou sole pure seraph of my earliest love, 20 Love so ineffable, and- so alone,

That nought on earth could more my bosom move,

And meeting thee in heaven was but to meet

That without which my soul, like the arkless dove, Had wander'd still in search of, nor her feet Relieved her wing till found ; without thy light My Paradise had still been incomplete. (2) Since my tenth sun gave summer to my sight Thou wert my life, the essence of my thought, Loved ere I knew the name of love, and bright 30 Still in these dim old eyes, now overwrought With the world's war, and years, and banishment And tears for thee, by other woes untaught; For mine is not a nature to be bent

By tyrannous faction^ and the brawling crowd And though the long, long conflict hath been spent In vain, and never more, save when the cloud Which overhangs the Apennine, my mind's eye Pierces to fancy Florence, once so proud Of me, can I return, though but to die, 40

Unto my native soil, they have not yet Quench'd the old exile's spirit, stern and high. But the sun, though not overcast, must set, And the night cometh; I ara old in days,
And deeds, and contemplation, and have met

Destruction face to face in all his ways.

The world hath left me, what it found me, pure, And if I have not gather'd yet its praise,

I sought it not by any baser lure ; \

P Man wrongs, and Time avenges, and my name May form a monument not all obscure, 51

Though such was not my ambition's end or aim, To add to the vain-glorious list of those "Who dabble in the pettiness of fame,

And make men's fickle breath the wind that blows Their sail, and deem it glory to be class'd With conquerors, and virtue's other foes,

In bloody chronicles of ages past.

I would have had my Florence great and free : (3) Oh Florence! Florence! unto me thou wast 60

Like that Jerusalem which the Almighty He Wept over, " but thou wouldst not;" as the bird Gathers its young, I would have gather'd thee

Beneath a parent pinion, hadst thou heard My voice; but as the adder, deaf and fierce, Against the breast that cherish'd thee was stirr'd

Thy venom, and my state thou didst amerce, And doom this body forfeit to the fire. Alas ! how bitter is his country's curse

To him who for that country would expire, 70 But did not merit to expire by her,
And loves her, loves her even in her ire. The day may come when she will cease to err, The day may come she would be proud to have The dust she dooms to scatter, and transfer (4) Of him, whom she denied a home, the grave. But this shall not be granted ; let my dust Lie where it falls 5 nor shall the soil which gave Me breath, but in her sudden fury thrust

Me forth to breathe elsewhere, so reassume 80 My indignant bones, because her angry gust Forsooth is over, and repeal'd her doom ;

No, she denied me what wa^mine — my roof,

- And shall not have what is not hers—my tomb. Too long her armed wrath hath kept aloof

The breast which would have bled for her, the

heart That beat, the mind that was temptation proof, The man who fought, toi I'd, travell'd, and each part Of a true citizen fulfill'd, and saw For his reward the Guelf's ascendant art 90 Pass his destruction even into a law.

These things are not made for forgetful ness, Florence shall be forgotten first ; too raw The wound, too deep the wrong, and the distress Of such endurance too prolong'd to make My pardon greater, her injustice less, Though late repented 5 yet— yet for her sake

I feel some fonder yearnings, and for thine, My own Beatrice, I would hardly take

Vengeance upon the land which once was mine, And still is hallow'd by thy dust's return, 101 Which would protect the murderess like a shrine,

And save ten thousand foes by thy sole urn. Though, like old Marius from Minturnse's marsh And Carthage ruins, my lone breast may burn

At times with evil feelings hot and harsh, And sometimes the last pangs of a vile foe Writhe in a dream before me, and o'erarch

My brow with hopes of triumph, — let them go ! Such are the last infirmities of those 110

Who long have suffer'd more than mortal woe,

And yet being mortal still, have no repose But on the pillow of Revenge — Revenge, Who sleeps to dream of blood, and waking glows

With the oft-baffled, slakeless thirst of change, When we shall mount again, and they that trod Be trampled on, while Death and Ate range

O'er humbled heads and sever'd necks Great God! Take these thoughts from me—to thy hands I

yield

My many wrongs, and thine almighty rod 120

Will fall on those who smote me, — be my shield ! As thou hast been in peril, and in pain, In turbulent cities, and the tented field
In toil, and many troubles borne in vain For Florence. — -I appeal from her to Thee ! Thee, whom I late saw in thy loftiest reign,
Even in that glorious vision, which to see And live was never granted until now, And yet thou hast permitted this to me.

Alas ! with what a weight upon my brow ISO

The sense of earth and earthly things come back, Corrosive passions, feelings dull and low,

The heart's quick throb upon the mental rack, Long day, and dreary night; the retrospect Of half a century bloody and black,

And the frail few years I may yet expect Hoary and hopeless, but less hard to bear, For I have been too long and deeply wreck'd

On the lone rock of desolate Despair

To lift my eyes more to the passing sail 140 Which shuns that reef so horrible and bare;

Nor raise my voice — for who would heed my wail ? I am not of this people, nor this age, And yet my harpings will unfold a tale

Which shall preserve these times when not a page Of their perturbed annals could attract •An eye to gaze upon their civil rage
Did not my verse embalm full many an act

Worthless as they who wrought it: 'tis the doom Of spirits of my order to be rack'd 150

In life, to wear their hearts out, and consume Their days in endless strife, and die alone ; Then future thousands crowd around their tomb,

And pilgrims come from climes where they have known The name of him — who now is but a name, And wasting homage o'er the sullen stone,

Spread his — by him unheard, unheeded — fame ; And mine at least hath cost me dear : to die Is nothing ; but to wither thus — to tame

My mind down from its own infinity — 160

To live in narrow ways with little men, A common sight to every common eye, _A wanderer, while even wolves can find a den, Ripp'd from all kindred, from all home, all things That make communion sweet, and soften painTo feel me in the solitude of kings

Without the power that makes them bear a

crownTo envy every dove his nest and wings

Which waft him where the Apennine looks down On Arno, till he perches, it may be, 170

Within my all inexorable town,

Where yet my boys are, and that fatal she, (5)
Thejr mother, the cold partner who hath brought Destruction for a dowry— this to see And feel, and know without repair, hath taught A bitter lesson ; but it leaves me free : I have not vilely found, nor basely sought^ ..... They made an Exile— not a slave of me.

CANTO II.

/The Spirit of the fervent days of Old,

When words were things that came to pass, and

thought Flashed o'er the future, bidding men behold

Their children's children's doom already brought Forth from the abyss of time which is to be, The chaos of events, where lie half-wrought

Shapes that must undergo mortality ;

What the great Seers of Israel wore within, That spirit was on them, and is on me,

And if, Cassandra-like, amidst the din 10

Of conflict none will hear, or hearing heed This voice from out the Wilderness, the sin

Be theirs, and my own feelings be my meed, The only guerdon I have ever known. Hast thou not bled ? and hast thou still to bleed,

Italia ? Ah ! to me such things, foreshown With dim sepulchral light, bid me forget
In thine irreparable wrongs my own ; "We can have but one country, and even yet

Thou'rt mine — my bones shall be within thy breast, 20

My soul within thy language, which once set With our old Roman sway in the wide West j

But I will make another tongue arise

As lofty and more sweet, in which exprest The hero's ardour, or the lover's sighs,

Shall find alike such sounds for every theme

That every word, as brilliant as thy skies, Shall realize a poet's proudest dream,

And make thee Europe's nightingale of song ;

So that all present speech to thine shall seem The note of meaner birds, and every tongue SI

Confess its barbarism when compared with thine.

This shalt thou owe to him thou didst so wrong, Thy Tuscan Bard, the banish 'd Ghibelline.

Woe ! woe ! the veil of coming centuries

Is rent, — a thousand years which yet supine Lie like the ocean waves ere winds arise,

Heaving in dark and sullen undulation,

Float from eternity into these eyes ;

The storms yet sleep, the clouds still keep then

station, 40

The unborn earthquake yet is in the womb.

The bloody chaos yet expects creation,

But all things are disposing for thy doom j The elements await but for the word, " Let there be darkness !" and thou grow'st a tomb !

Yes ! thou, so beautiful, shalt feel the sword, Thou, Italy ! so fair that Paradise, Revived in thee, blooms forth to man restored:

Ah ! must the sons of Adam lose it twice ?

Thou, Italy ! whose ever golden fields, 50

Plough'd by the sunbeams solely, would suffice

For the world's granary ; thou, whose sky heaven gilds With brighter stars, and robes with deeper blue ; Thou, in whose pleasant places Summer builds

Her palace, in whose cradle Empire grew, And form'd the Eternal City's ornaments From spoils of kings whom freemen overthrew ;

Birthplace of heroes, sanctuary of saints,

Where earthly first, then heavenly glory made Her home; thou, all which fondest fancy paints,

And finds her prior vision but portray'd 61

In feeble colours, when the eye — from the Alp Of horrid snow, and rock, and shaggy shade

Of desert-loving pine, whose emerald scalp

Nods to the storm — dilates and dotes o'er thee, And wistfully implores, as 'twere, for help

To see thy sunny fields, my Italy,

Nearer and nearer yet, and dearer still The more approach'd, and dearest were they free,

Thou — Thou must wither to each tyrant's will : 70 The Goth hath been,— the German, Frank, and

Hun Are yet to come, — and on the imperial hill,

Ruin, already proud of the deeds done

By the old barbarians, there awaits the new, Throned on the Palatine, while lost and won

Rome at her feet lies bleeding, and the hue Of human sacrifice and Roman slaughter Troubles the clotted air, of late so blue,

And deepens into red the saffron water 79

Of Tiber, thick with dead ; the helpless priest, And still more helpless nor less holy daughter,

Vow'd to their God, have shrieking fled, and ceased Their ministry : the nations take their prey, Iberian, Almain, Lombard, and the beast

And bird, wolf, vulture, more humane than they Are ; these but gorge the flesh and lap the gore Of the departed, and then go their way;

But those, the human savages, explore All paths of torture, and insatiate yet, With Ugolino hunger prowl for more. 90

Nine moons shall rise o'er scenes like this and set: (6)

The chiefless army of the dead, which late Beneath the traitor Prince's banner met,

Hath left its leader's ashes at the gate ; Had but the royal Rebel lived, perchance Thou hadst been spared, but his involved thy

fate. Oh ! Rome, the spoiler or the spoil of France, From Brennus to the Bourbon, never, never Shall foreign standard to thy walls advance

But Tiber shall become a mournful river. 100

Oh ! when the strangers pass the Alps and Po, Crush them, ye rocks ! floods, whelm them, and for ever!

Why sleep the idle avalanches so,

To topple on the lonely pilgrim's head ? Why doth Eridanus but overflow

The peasant's harvest from his turbid bed ? Were not each barbarous horde a nobler prey ? Over Cambyses' host the desert spread

Her sandy ocean, and the sea waves' sway Roll'd over Pharaoh and his thousands, — why, Mountains and waters, do ye not as they ? til

And you, ye men ! Romans, who dare not die, Sons of the conquerors who overthrew Those who overthrew proud Xerxes, where yet lie

The dead whose tomb Oblivion never knew, Are the Alps weaker than Thermopylee ?

Their passes more alluring to the view

Of an invader? is it they, or ye,

That to each host the mountain -gate unbar, And leave the march in peace, the passage free ?

Why, Nature's self detains the victor's car 121 And makes your land impregnable, if earth Could be so; but alone she will Dot war,

Yet aids the warrior worthy of his birth In a soil where the mothers bring forth men i Not so with those whose souls are little worth 3

For them no fortress can avail, — the den Of the poor reptile which preserves its sting Is more secure than walls of adamant, when

The hearts of those within are quivering. 130

Are ye not brave? Yes, yet the Ausonian soil Hath hearts, and hands, and arms, and hosts to bring

Against Oppression ; but how vain the toil, While still Division sows the seeds of woe And weakness, till the stranger reaps the spoil.

Oh ! my own beauteous land ! so long laid low, So long the grave of thy own children's hopes, When there is but required a single blow '

To break the chain, yet — yet the Avenger stops, And Doubt and Discord step 'twixt thine and thee,
And join their strength to that which with thee copes ; What is there wanting then to set thee free,

And show thy beauty in its fullest light ?

To make the Alps impassable ; and we, Her sons, may do this with one deed Unite !

CANTO III.

From out the mass of never dying ill, The Plague, the Prince, the Stranger, and the

Sword, Vials of wrath but emptied to refill And flow again, I cannot all record

That crowds on my prophetic eye: the earth And ocean written o'e r would not afford Space for the annal, yet it shall go forth;

Yes, all, though not by human pen, is graven, There where the farthest 'suns and stars have birth. Spread like a banner at the erate of heaven, 10. The bloody scroll of our millennial wrongs Waves, and the echo of our groans is driven Athwart the sound of archangelic songs, And Italy, the martyr'd nation's gore, Will not in vain arise to where belongs Omnipotence and mercy evermore :
Like to a harpstring stricken by the wind, The sound of her lament shall, rising o'er The seraph voices, touch the Almighty Mind. Meantime I, humblest of thy sons, and of 20 Earth's dust by immortality refined To sense and suffering, though the vain may scoff, And tyrants threat, and meeker victims bow Before the storm because its breath is rough, To thee, my country ! whom before, as now, I loved and love, devote the mournful lyre And melancholy gift high powers allow To read the future; and if now my fire Is not as once it shone o'er thee, forgive! I but foretell thy fortunes— then expire; SO Think not that I would look on them and live. A spirit forces me to see and speak, And for my guerdon grants not to survive ; My heart shall be pour'd over thee and break: Yet for a moment, 1ere I must resume Thy sable web of sorrow, let me take Over the gleams that flash athwart thy gloom A softer glimpse; some stars shine through thy

night, And many meteors, and above thy tomb Leans sculptured Beauty, which Death cannot blight ; 40

And from thine ashes boundless spirits rise
To o-ive thee honour, and the earth delight; Thy soil shall still he pregnant with the wise, The gay, the learn'd, the generous, and the

brave, Native to thee as summer to thy skies, Conquerors on foreign shores, and the far wave, (7) Discoverers of new worlds, which take their

name ; (8) For thee alone they have no arm to save, And all thy recompense is in their fame,

A noble one to them, but not to thee — 50

Shall they be glorious, and thou still the same? Oh ! more than these illustrious far shall be The being — and even yet he may be born— The mortal saviour who shall set thee free, And see thy diadem, so changed and worn By fresh barbarians, on thy brow replaced ; And the sweet sun replenishing thy morn, Thy moral morn, too long with clouds defaced And noxious vapours from Avernus risen, Such as all they must breathe who are debased By servitude, and have the mind in prison. 61 Yet through this centuried eclipse of woe Some voices shall be heard, and earth shall listen ; Poets shall follow in the path I show,

And make it broader ; the same brilliant sky

Which cheers the birds to song shall bid them glow,

And raise their notes as natural and high ;

Tuneful shall be their numbers : they shall sing Many of love, and some of liberty,

But few shall soar upon that eagle's wing, 70

And look in the sun's face with eagle's gaze All free and fearless as the feather'd king,

But fly more near the earth j how many a phrase Sublime shall lavishM be on some small prince In all the prodigality of praise !

And language, eloquently false, evince The harlotry of genius, which, like beauty, Too oft forgets its own self-reverence,

And looks on prostitution as a duty. ,

(9) He who once enters in a tyrant's hail ' 80 As guest is slave, his thoughts become a booty,

And the first day which sees the chain enthral A captive, sees his half of manhood gone— (10) The soul's emasculation saddens all

Plis spirit; thus the Bard too near the throne Quails from his inspiration, bound to please,—*

• How servile is the task to please alone !

To smooth the verse to suit his sovereign's ease And royal leisure, nor too much prolong Aught save his eulogy, and find, and seize, 90

Or force, or forge fit argument of song !
Thus trammell'd, thus condemn'd to Flattery's

trebles, He toils through all, still trembling to be wrong : For fear some noble thoughts, like heavenly rebels, Should rise up in high treason to his brain, He sings, as the Athenian spoke, with pebbles In 's mouth, lest truth should stammer through his strain. But out of the long file of sonneteers There shall be some who will not sing in vain, And he, their prince, shall rank among my

peers, (11) 10°

And. love shall be his torment; but his grief Shall make an immortality of tears, And Italy shall hail him as the Chief Of Poet-lovers, and his higher song Of Freedom wreathe him with as green a leaf* But in a farther age shall rise along

The banks of Po, two greater still than he; The world which smiled on him shall do them wrong Till they are ashes, and repose with me.

The first will make an epoch with his lyre, 110 And fill the earth with feats of chivalry : His fancy like a rainbow, and his fire,

Like that of heaven, immortal, and his thought Borne onward with a wing that cannot tire ;
Pleasure shall, like a butterfly new caught,

Flutter her lovely pinions o'er his theme,

And Art itself seem into Nature wrought' By the transparency of his bright dream

The second, of a tenderer, sadder mood, "

Shall pour his soul out o'er Jerusalem ; 120

He, too, shall sing of arms, and Christian blood

Shed where Christ bled for man ; and his high harp

Shall, by the willow over Jordan's flood, Revive a song of Sion, and the sharp

Conflict, and final triumph of the brave

And pious, and the strife of hell to warp Their hearts from their great purpose, until wave

The red-cross banners where the first red Cross

Was crimson'd from his veins who died to save, Shall be his sacred argument; the loss 130

Of years, of favour, freedom, even of fame

Contested for a time, while the smooth gloss Of courts would slide o'er his forgotten name,

And call captivity a kindness, meant .

To shield him from insanity or shame, Such shall be his meet guerdon! who was sent

To be Christ's Laureate — they reward him well !

Florence dooms me but death or banishment, Ferrara him a pittance and a cell,

Harder to bear and less deserved, for I 
Had stung the factions which I strove to quell ; But this meek man, who with a lover's eye

Will look on earth and heaven, and who will deign

To embalm with his celestial flattery As poor a thing as e'er was spawn'd to reign,

What will he do to merit such a doom ?

Perhaps he'll love, — and is not tove in vain Torture enough without a living tomb ?

Yet it will be so — he and his compeer,

The Bard of Chivalry, will both consume 150 In penury and pain too many a year,

And, dying in despondency, bequeath

To the kind world, which scarce will yield a tear, A hermitage enriching all who breathe

With the wealth of a genuine poet's soul,

And to their country a redoubled wreath, Unmatch'd by time ; not Hellas can unroll

Through her olympiads two such names, though one

Of hers be mighty;— and is this the whole Of such men's destiny beneath the sun ? 160

Must all the finer thoughts, the thrilling sense,

The electric blood with which their arteries run, Their body's self turn'd soul with the intense

Feeling of that which is, and fancy of

That which should be, to such a recompense Conduct ? shall their bright plumage on the rough

Storm be still scattered P Yes, and it must be,

For, form'd of far too penetrable stuff, These birds of Paradise but long to flee

Back to their native mansion, soon they find 170

Earth's mist with their pure pinions not agree, And die or are degraded, for the mind N.

Succumbs to long infection, and despair, \

And vulture passions flying close behind, / Await the moment to assail and tear ;

And when at length the winged wanderers stoop,

Then is the prey -bird's triumph, then they share The spoil, o'erpower'd at length by one fell swoop.

Yet some have been untouch'd, who learn'd to bear,

Some whom no power could ever force to droop, Who could resist themselves even, hardest care!

And task most hopeless; but some such have been, 182

And if my name amongst the number were, That destiny austere, and yet serene,

"Were prouder than more dazzling fame unblest ;

The Alp's snow summit nearer heaven is seen Than the volcano's fierce eruptive crest,

Whose splendour from the black abyss is flung,
While the scorch'd mountain, from whose burning breast

A temporary torturing flame is wrung, 190

Shines for a night of terror, then repels Its fire back to the hell from whence it sprung,

The hell which in its entrails ever dwells.

CANTO IV.

Many are poets who have never penn'd Their inspiration, and perchance the best : They felt, and loved, and died, but would not lend

Their thoughts to meaner beings; they compressed The god within them, and rejoin*d the stars Unlaurell'd upon earth, but far more blest

Than those who are degraded by the jars Of passion, and their frailties link'd to fame, Conquerors of high renown, but full of scars.

Many are poets but without the name, 10

For what is poesy but to create From overfeeling good or ill ; and aim

At an external life beyond our fate, And be the new Prometheus of new men, Bestowing fire from heaven, and then, too late,

Finding the pleasure given repaid with pain, And vultures to the heart ol the bestower,
Who, having lavish'd his high gift in vain, Lies chain'd to his lone rock by the sea-shore ?

So be it: we can bear. — But thus all they, 20

Whose intellect is an overmastering power Which still recoils from its encumbering clay

Or lightens it to spirit, whatsoe'er

The form which their creations may essay, Are bards ; the kindled marble's bust may wear

More poesy upon its speaking brow

Than aught less than the Homeric page may bear ; One noble stroke with a whole life may glow,

Or deify the canvas till it shine

With beauty so surpassing all below, SO

That they who kneel to idols so divine

Break no commandment, for high heaven is there

Transfused, transfigu rated : and the line Of poesy, which peoples but the air

With thought and beings of our thought reflected,

Can do no more : then let the artist share The palm, he shares the peril, and dejected

Faints o'er the labour unapproved — Alas!

Despair and Genius are too oft connected. Within the ages which before me pass 40

Art shall resume and equal even the sway

Which with Apelles and old Phidias She held in Hellas' unforgotten day.
Ye shall be taught by Ruin to revive

The Grecian forms at least from their decay,

And Roman souls at last again shall live In Roman works wrought by Italian hands, And temples, loftier than the old temples, give

New wonders to the world; and while still stands The austere Pantheon, into heaven shall soar 50 A dome, (12) its image, while the base expands

Into a fane surpassing all before,

Such as all flesh shall flock to kneel in: ne'er Such sight hath been unfolded by a door

As this, to which all nations shall repair

And lay their sins at this huge gate of heaven. And the bold Architect unto whose care

The daring charge to raise it shall be given, Whom all arts shall acknowledge as their lord, "Whether into the marble chaos driven 60

His chisel bid the Hebrew, (13) at whose word Israel left Egypt, stop the waves in stone, Or hues of hell be by his pencil pour'd

Over the damn'd before the Judgment throne, (14) Such as I saw them, such as all shall see, Or fanes be built of grandeur yet unknown,

The stream of his great thoughts shall spring from me, (15) The Ghibelline, who traversed the three realms Which form the empire of eternity.
Amidst the clash of swords, and clang of helms, The age which I anticipate, no less 71

Shall be the Age of Beauty, and while whelms

Calamity the nations with distress, The genius of my country shall arise, A Cedar towering o'er the Wilderness,

Lovely in all its branches to all eyes, Fragrant as fair, and recognized afar, Wafting its native incense through the skies.

Sovereigns shall pause amidst their sport of war Wean'd for an hour from blood, to turn an<

gaze On canvas or on stone ; and they who mar

AH beauty upon earth, compell'd to praise, Shall feel the power of that which they destroy? And Art's mistaken gratitude shall raise

To tyrants who but take her for a toy Emblems and monuments, and prostitute Her charms to pontiffs proud, (16) who but employ

The man of genius as the meanest brute To bear a burthen, and to serve a need, To sell his labours, and his soul to boot:

Who toils for nations may be poor indeed

But free; who sweats for monarchs is no more

Than the gilt chamberlain, who, clothed am

fce'd,
Stands sleek and slavish, bowing at his door. Oh, Power that rulest and inspirest ! how Is it that they on earth, whose earthly power

Is likest thine in heaven in outward show, Least like to thee in attributes divine, Tread on the universal necks that bow,

And then assure us that their rights are thine ? 100 And how is it that they, the sons of fame, "Whose inspiration seems to them to shine

From high, they whom the nations oftest name, Must pass their days in penury and pain, Or step to grandeur through the paths of shame,

And wear a deeper brand, and gaudier chain? Or if their destiny be born aloof From lowliness, or tempted thence in vain,

In their own souls sustain a harder proof,

The inner war of passions deep and fierce ? 1 10 Florence ! when thy harsh sentence razed my roof, ' I loved thee ; but the vengeance of my verse, The hate of injuries which every year Makes greater, and accumulates my curse,

Shall live, outliving all thou holdest dear,

Thy pride, thy wealth, thy freedom, and even

that,

The most infernal of all evils here,

The sway of petty tyrants in a state;
For such sway is not limited to kings,

And demagogues yield to them but in date 120

As swept off sooner; in all deadly things

Which make men hate themselves, and one another, In discord, cowardice, cruelty, all that springs

From Death the Sin-born's incest with his mother, In rank oppression in its rudest shape, The faction Chief is but the Sultan's brother*,

And the worst despot's far less human ape : Florence ! when this lone spirit, which so long Yearn'd, as the captive toiling at escape,

To fly back to thee in despite of wrong, 15(

An exile, saddest of all prisoners, Who has the whole world for a dungeon strong,

Seas, mountains, and the horizon's verge for bars, Which shut him from the sole small spot of earth Where — whatsoe'er his fate — -he still were hers,

His country's, and might die where he had birth — Florence ! when this lone spirit shall return To kindred spirits, thou wilt feel my worth,

And seek to honour with an empty urn The ashes thou shalt ne'er obtain — Alas ! 140 " What have I done to the.e, my people ?" (17) Stern

Are all thy dealings, but in this they pass The limits of man's common malice, for
All that a citizen could be I was ; Raised by thy will, all thine in peace or war,

And for this thou hast warr'd with me. — 'Tis done:

I may not overleap the eternal bar Built up between us, and will die alone,

Beholding, with the dark eye of a seer,

The evil days to gifted souls foreshown, 15Q Foretelling them to those who will not hear,

As in the old time, till the hour be come

When Truth shall strike their eyes through many a tear, And make them own the Prophet in his tomb.

 I.
'Tis known, at least it should be, that throughout
All countries of the Catholic persuasion,
Some weeks before Shrove Tuesday comes about,
The people take their fill of recreation,
And buy repentance, ere they grow devout,
However high their rank, or low their station,
With fiddling, feasting, dancing, drinking, masking,
And other things which may be had for asking.

     II.
The moment night with dusky mantle covers
The skies (and the more duskily the better),
The time less liked by husbands than by lovers
Begins, and prudery flings aside her fetter;
And gaiety on restless tiptoe hovers,
Giggling with all the gallants who beset her;
And there are songs and quavers, roaring, humming,
Guitars, and every other sort of strumming.

     III.
And there are dresses splendid, but fantastical,
Masks of all times and nations, Turks and Jews,
And harlequins and clowns, with feats gymnastical,
Greeks, Romans, Yankee-doodles, and Hindoos;
All kinds of dress, except the ecclesiastical,
All people, as their fancies hit, may choose,
But no one in these parts may quiz the clergy, —
Therefore take heed, ye Freethinkers! I charge ye.

     IV.
You'd better walk about begirt with briars,
Instead of coat and smallclothes, than put on
A single stitch reflecting upon friars,
Although you swore it only was in fun;
They'd haul you o'er the coals, and stir the fires
Of Phlegethon with every mother's son,
Nor say one mass to cool the caldron's bubble
That boil'd your bones, unless you paid them double.

     V.
But saving this, you may put on whate'er
You like by way of doublet, cape, or cloak.
Such as in Monmouth-street, or in Rag Fair,
Would rig you out in seriousness or joke;
And even in Italy such places are,
With prettier name in softer accents spoke,
For, bating Covent Garden, I can hit on
No place that's called "Piazza" in Great Britain.

     VI.
This feast is named the Carnival, which being
Interpreted, implies "farewell to flesh:"
So call'd, because the name and thing agreeing,
Through Lent they live on fish, both salt and fresh.
But why they usher Lent with so much glee in,
Is more than I can tell, although I guess
'Tis as we take a glass with friends at parting,
In the stage-coach or packet, just at starting,

     VII.
And thus they bid farewell to carnal dishes,
And solid meats, and highly spiced ragouts,
To live for forty days on ill-dress'd fishes,
Because they have no sauces to their stews;
A thing which causes many "poohs" and "pishes,"
And several oaths (which would not suit the Muse),
From travellers accustom'd from a boy
To eat their salmon, at the least, with soy;

     VIII.
And therefore humbly I would recommend
"The curious in fish-sauce," before they cross
The sea, to bid their cook, or wife, or friend,
Walk or ride to the Strand, and buy in gross
(Or if set out beforehand, these may send
By any means least liable to loss)
Ketchup, Soy, Chili-vinegar, and Harvey,
Or by the Lord! a Lent will well nigh starve ye;

     IX.
That is to say, if your religion's Roman,
And you at Rome would do as Romans do,
According to the proverb, — although no man
If foreign, is obliged to fast; and you
If Protestant, or sickly, or a woman,
Would rather dine in sin on a ragout —
Dine and be d—d! I don't mean to be coarse,
But that's the penalty, to say no worse.

     X.
Of all the places where the Carnival
Was most facetious in the days of yore,
For dance, and song, and serenade, and ball,
And masque, and mime, and mystery, and more
Than I have time to tell now, or at all,
Venice the bell from every city bore, —
And at the moment when I fix my story,
That sea-born city was in all her glory.

     XI.
They've pretty faces yet, those same Venetians,
Black-eyes, arch'd brows, and sweet expressions still;
Such as of old were copied from the Grecians,
In ancient arts by moderns mimick'd ill;
And like so many Venuses of Titian's
(The best's at Florence — see it, if ye will),
They look when leaning over the balcony,
Or stepp'd from out a picture by Giorgione,

     XII.
Whose tints are truth and beauty at their best;
And when you to Manfrini's palace go,
That picture (howsoever fine the rest)
Is loveliest to my mind of all the show;
It may perhaps be also to your zest,
And that's the cause I rhyme upon it so:
'Tis but a portrait of his son, and wife,
And self; but such a woman! love in life!

     XIII.
Love in full life and length, not love ideal,
No, nor ideal beauty, that fine name,
But something better still, so very real,
That the sweet model must have been the same;
A thing that you would purchase, beg, or steal,
Were 't not impossible, besides a shame:
The face recalls some face, as't were with pain,
You once have seen, but ne'er will see again.

     XIV.
One of those forms which flit by us, when we
Are young, and fix our eyes on every face;
And, oh! the loveliness at times we see
In momentary gliding, the soft grace,
The youth, the bloom, the beauty which agree,
In many a nameless being we retrace,
whose course, and home we knew not, nor shall know,
Like the lost Pleiad seen no more below.

     XV.
I said that like a picture by Giorgione
Venetian women were, and so they are,
Particularly seen from a balcony
(For beauty's sometimes best set off afar),
And there, just like a heroine of Goldoni,
They peep from out the blind, or o'er the bar;
And truth to say, they're mostly very pretty,
And rather like to show it, more's the pity!

     XVI.
For glances beget ogles, ogles sighs,
Sighs wishes, wishes words, and words a letter,
Which flies on wings of light-heel'd Mercuries,
Who do such things because they know no better;
And then, God knows what mischief may arise,
When love links two young people in one fetter,
Vile assignations, and adulterous beds,
Elopements, broken vows, and hearts, and heads.

     XVII.
Shakespeare described the sex in Desdemona
As very fair, but yet suspect in fame,
And to this day from Venice to Verona
Such matters may be probably the same,
Except that since those times was never known a
Husband whom mere suspicion could inflame
To suffocate a wife no more than twenty,
Because she had a "cavalier servente."

     XVIII.
Their jealousy (if they are ever jealous)
Is of a fair complexion altogether,
Not like that sooty devil of Othello's,
Which smothers women in a bed of feather,
But worthier of these much more jolly fellows,
When weary of the matrimonial tether
His head for such a wife no mortal bothers,
But takes at once another, or another's.

     XIX.
Didst ever see a Gondola? For fear
You should not, I'll describe it you exactly:
"Tis a long cover'd boat that's common here,
Carved at the prow, build lightly, but compactly,
Row'd by two rowers, each call'd "Gondolier,"
It glides along the water looking blackly,
Just like a coffin clapt in a canoe,
Where none can make out what you say or do.

     XX.
And up and down the long canals they go,
And under the Rialto shoot along,
By night and day, all paces, swift or slow,
And round the theatres, a sable throng,
They wait in their dusk livery of woe, —
But not to them do woeful things belong,
For sometimes they contain a deal of fun,
Like mourning coaches when the funeral's done.

     XXI.
But to my story. — 'Twas some years ago,
It may be thirty, forty, more or less,
The Carnival was at its height, and so
Were all kinds of buffoonery and dress;
A certain lady went to see the show,
Her real name I know not, nor can guess,
And so we'll call her Laura, if you please,
Because it slips into my verse with ease.

     XXII.
She was not old, nor young, nor at the years
Which certain people call a "certain age,"
Which yet the most uncertain age appears,
Because I never heard, nor could engage
A person yet by prayers, or bribes, or tears,
To name, define by speech, or write on page,
The period meant precisely by that word, —
Which surely is exceedingly absurd.

     XXIII.
Laura was blooming still, had made the best
Of time, and time return'd the compliment,
She look'd extremely well where'er she went;
A pretty woman is a welcome guest,
And Laura's brow a frown had rarely bent;
Indeed, she shone all smiles, and seem'd to flatter
Mankind with her black eyes for looking at her.

     XXIV.
She was a married woman; 'tis convenient,
Because in Christian countries 'tis a rule
To view their little slips with eyes more lenient;
Whereas if single ladies play the fool
(Unless within the period intervenient
A well-times wedding makes the scandal cool),
I don't know how they ever can get over it,
Except they manage never to discover it.

     XXV.
Her husband sail'd upon the Adriatic,
And made some voyages, too, in other seas,
And when he lay in quarantine for pratique
(A forty days' precaution 'gainst disease),
His wife would mount, at times, her highest attic,
For thence she could discern the ship with ease;
He was a merchant trading to Aleppo,
His name Giuseppe, call'd more briefly, Beppo.

     XXVI.
He was a man as dusky as a Spaniard,
Sunburnt with travel, yet a portly figure;
Though colour'd, as it were, within a tan-yard,
He was a person both of sense and vigour —
A better seaman never yet did man yard;
And she, although her manners show'd no rigour,
Was deem'd a woman of the strictest principle,
So much as to be thought almost invincible.

     XXVII.
But several years elapsed since they had met;
Some people thought the ship was lost, and some
That he had somehow blunder'd into debt,
And did not like the thought of steering home;
And there were several offer'd any bet,
Or that he would, or that he would not come;
For most men (till by losing render'd sager)
Will back their own opinions with a wager.

     XXVIII.
'Tis said that their last parting was pathetic,
As partings often are, or ought to be,
And their presentiment was quite prophetic,
That they should never more each other see,
(A sort of morbid feeling, half poetic,
Which I have known occur in two or three,)
When kneeling on the shore upon her sad knee
He left this Adriatic Ariadne.

     XXIX.
And Laura waited long, and wept a little,
And thought of wearing weeds, as well she might;
She almost lost all appetite for victual,
And could not sleep with ease along at night;
She deem'd the window-frames and shutters brittle
Against a daring housebreaker or sprite,
And so she thought it prudent to connect her.
With a vice-husband, chiefly to protect her.

     XXX.
She chose, (and what is there they will not choose,
If only you will but oppose their choice?)
Till Beppo should return from his long cruise,
And bid once more her faithful heart rejoice,
A man some women like, and yet abuse —
A coxcomb was he by the public voice;
A Count of wealth, they said, as well as quality,
And in his pleasures of great liberality.

     XXXI.
And then he was A Count, and then he knew
Music, and dancing, fiddling, French and Tuscan;
The last not easy, be it known to you.
For few Italians speak the right Etruscan.
He was a critic upon operas, too,
And knew all niceties of the sock and buskin;
And no Venetian audience could endure a
Song, scene, or air, when he cried "seccatura!"

     XXXII.
His "bravo" was decisive, for that sound
Hush'd "Academie" sigh'd in silent awe;
The fiddlers trembled as he look'd around,
For fear of some false note's detected flaw;
The "prima donna's" tuneful heart would bound,
Dreading the deep damnation of his "bah!"
Soprano, basso, even the contra-alto,
Wish'd him five fathom under the Rialto.

     XXXIII.
He patronised the Improvisatori,
Nay, could himself extemporise some stanzas,
Wrote rhymes, sang songs, could also tell a story,
Sold pictures, and was skilful in the dance as
Italians can be, though in this their glory
Must surely yield the palm to that which France has;
In short, he was a perfect cavaliero,
And to his very valet seem'd a hero.

     XXIV.
Then he was faithful too, as well as amorous;
So that no sort of female could complain,
Although they're now and then a little clamourous,
He never put the pretty souls in pain;
His heart was one of those which most enamour us,
Wax to receive, and marble to retain:
He was a lover of the good old school,
Who still become more constant as they cool.

     XXXV.
No wonder such accomplishments should turn
A female head, however sage and steady —
With scarce a hope that Beppo could return,
In law he was almost as good as dead, he
Nor sent, nor wrote, nor show'd the least concern,
And she had waited several years already;
And really if a man won't let us know
That he's alive, he's dead, or should be so.

     XXXVI.
Besides, within the Alps, to every woman,
(Although, God knows, it is a grievous sin,)
'Tis, I may say, permitted to have two men;
I can't tell who first brought the custom in,
But "Cavalier Serventes" are quite common,
And no one notices nor cares a pin;
And we may call this (not to say the worst)
A second marriage which corrupts the first.

     XXXVII.
The word was formerly a "Cicisbeo,"
But that is now grown vulgar and indecent;
The Spaniards call the person a "Cortejo,"
For the same mode subsists in Spain, though recent;
In short, it reaches from the Po to Teio,
And may perhaps at last be o'er the sea sent:
But Heaven preserve Old England from such courses!
Or what becomes of damage and divorces?

     XXXVIII.
However, I still think, with all due deference
To the fair single part of the creation,
That married ladies should preserve the preference
In tête-à-tête or general conversation —
And this I say without peculiar reference
To England, France, or any other nation —
Because they know the world, and are at ease,
And being natural, naturally please.

     XXXIX.
"Tis true, your budding Miss is very charming,
But shy and awkward at first coming out,
So much alarm'd, that she is quite alarming,
All Giggle, Blush; half Pertness, and half-Pout;
And glancing at Mamma, for fear there's harm in
What you, she, it, or they, may be about,
The nursery still lisps out in all they utter —
Besides, they always smell of bread and butter.

     XL.
But "Cavalier Servente" is the phrase
Used in politest circles to express
This supernumerary slave, who stays
Close to the lady as a part of dress,
Her word the only law which he obeys.
His is no sinecure, as you may guess;
Coach, servants, gondola, he goes to call,
And carries fan and tippet, gloves and shawl.

     XLI.
With all its sinful doings, I must say,
That Italy's a pleasant place to me,
Who love to see the Sun shine every day,
And vines (not nail'd to walls) from tree to tree
Festoon'd, much like the back scene of a play,
Or melodrame, which people flock to see,
When the first act is ended by a dance
In vineyards copied from the south of France.

     XLII.
I like on Autumn evenings to ride out,
Without being forced to bid my groom be sure
My cloak is round his middle strapp'd about,
Because the skies are not the most secure;
I know too that, if stopp'd upon my route,
Where the green alleys windingly allure,
Reeling with grapes red waggons choke the way, —
In England 't would be dung, dust, or a dray.

     XLIII.
I also like to dine on becaficas,
To see the Sun set, sure he'll rise tomorrow,
Not through a misty morning twinkling weak as
A drunken man's dead eye in maudlin sorrow,
But with all Heaven t'himself; the day will break as
Beauteous as cloudless, nor be forced to borrow
That sort of farthing candlelight which glimmers
Where reeking London's smoky caldron simmers.

     XLIV.
I love the language, that soft bastard Latin,
Which melts like kisses from a female mouth,
And sounds as if it should be writ on satin,
With syllables which breathe of the sweet South,
And gentle liquids gliding all so pat in,
That not a single accent seems uncouth,
Like our harsh northern whistling, grunting guttural,
Which we're obliged to hiss, and spit, and sputter all.

     XLV.
I like the women too (forgive my folly),
From the rich peasant cheek of ruddy bronze,
And large black eyes that flash on you a volley
Of rays that say a thousand things at once,
To the high dama's brow, more melancholy,
But clear, and with a wild and liquid glance,
Heart on her lips, and soul within her eyes,
Soft as her clime, and sunny as her skies.

     XLVI.
Eve of the land which still is Paradise!
Italian beauty! didst thou not inspire
Raphael, who died in thy embrace, and vies
With all we know of Heaven, or can desire,
In what he hath bequeath'd us? — in what guise,
Though flashing from the fervour of the lyre,
Would words describe thy past and present glow,
While yet Canova can create below?

     XLVII.
"England! with all thy faults I love thee still,"
I said at Calais, and have not forgot it;
I like to speak and lucubrate my fill;
I like the government (but that is not it);
I like the freedom of the press and quill;
I like the Hapeas Corpus (when we've got it);
I like a parliamentary debate,
Particularly when 'tis not too late;

     XLVIII.
I like the taxes, when they're not too many;
I like a seacoal fire, when not too dear;
I like a beef-steak, too, as well as any;
Have no objection to a pot of beer;
I like the weather, when it is not rainy,
That is, I like two months of every year,
And so God save the Regent, Church, and King!
Which means that I like all and everything.

     XLIX.
Our standing army, and disbanded seamen,
Poor's rate, Reform, my own, the nation's debt,
Our little riots just to show we are free men,
Our trifling bankruptcies in the Gazette,
Our cloudy climate, and our chilly women,
All these I can forgive, and those forget,
And greatly venerate our recent glories,
And wish they were not owing to the Tories.

     L.
But to my tale of Laura, — for I find
Digression is a sin, that by degrees
Becomes exceeding tedious to my mind,
And, therefore, may the reader too displease —
The gentle reader, who may wax unkind,
And caring little for the author's ease,
Insist on knowing what he means, a hard
And hapless situation for a bard.

     LI.
Oh that I had the art of easy writing
What should be easy reading! could I scale
Parnassus, where the Muses sit inditing
Those pretty poems never known to fail,
How quickly would I print (the world delighting)
A Grecian, Syrian, or Assyrian tale;
And sell you, mix'd with western sentimentalism,
Some samples of the finest Orientalism!

     LII.
But I am but a nameless sort of person,
(A broken Dandy lately on my travels)
And take for rhyme, to hook my rambling verse on,
The first that Walker's Lexicon unravels,
And when I can't find that, I put a worse on,
Not caring as I ought for critics' cavils;
I've half a mind to tumble down to prose,
But verse is more in fashion — so here goes.

     LIII.
The Count and Laura made their new arrangement,
Which lasted, as arrangements sometimes do,
For half a dozen years without estrangement;
They had their little differences, too;
Those jealous whiffs, which never any change meant;
In such affairs there probably are few
Who have not had this pouting sort of squabble,
From sinners of high station to the rabble.

     LIV.
But on the whole, they were a happy pair,
As happy as unlawful love could make them;
The gentleman was fond, the lady fair,
Their chains so slight, 'twas not worth while to break them;
The world beheld them with indulgent air;
The pious only wish'd "the devil take them!"
He took them not; he very often waits,
And leaves old sinners to be young ones' baits.

     LV.
But they were young: Oh! what without our youth
Would love be! What would youth be without love!
Youth lends it joy, and sweetness, vigour, truth,
Heart, soul, and all that seems as from above;
But, languishing with years, it grows uncouth —
One of few things experience don't improve,
Which is, perhaps, the reason why old fellows
Are always so preposterously jealous.

     LVI.
It was the Carnival, as I have said
Some six and thirty stanzas back, and so
Laura the usual preparations made,
Which you do when your mind's made up to go
To-night to Mrs. Boehm's masquerade,
Spectator, or partaker in the show;
The only difference known between the cases
Is — here, we have six weeks of "varnish'd faces."

     LVII.
Laura, when dress'd, was (as I sang before)
A pretty woman as was ever seen,
Fresh as the Angel o'er a new inn door,
Or frontispiece of a new Magazine,
With all the fashions which the last month wore,
Colour'd, and silver paper leaved between
That and the title-page, for fear the press
Should soil with parts of speech the parts of dress.

     LVIII.
They went to the Ridotto; — 'tis a hall
Where people dance, and sup, and dance again;
Its proper name, perhaps, were a masqued ball,
But that's of no importance to my strain;
'Tis (on a smaller scale) like our Vauxhall,
Excepting that it can't be spoilt by rain;
The company is "mix'd" (the phrase I quote is
As much as saying they're below your notice);

     LIX.
For a "mix'd company" implies that, save
Yourself and friends, and half a hundred more,
Whom you may bow to without looking grave,
The rest are but a vulgar set, the bore
Of public places, where they basely brave
The fashionable stare of twenty score
Of well-bred persons, call'd "The World;" but I,
Although I know them, really don't know why.

     LX.
This is the case in England; at least was
During the dynasty of Dandies, now
Perchance succeeded by some other class
Of imitated imitators: — how
Irreparably soon decline, alas!
The demagogues of fashion: all below
Is frail; how easily the world is lost
By love, or war, and now and then by frost!

     LXI.
Crush'd was Napoleon by the northern Thor,
Who knock'd his army down with icy hammer,
Stopp'd by the elements, like a whaler, or
A blundering novice in his new French grammar;
Good cause had he to doubt the chance of war,
And as for Fortune — but I dare not d—n her,
Because, were I to ponder to infinity,
The more I should believe in her divinity.

     LXII.
She rules the present, past, and all to be yet,
She gives us luck in lotteries, love, and marriage;
I cannot say that she's done much for me yet;
Not that I mean her bounties to disparage,
We've not yet closed accounts, and we shall see yet;
How much she'll make amends for past miscarriage.
Meantime the Goddess I'll no more importune,
Unless to thank her when she's made my fortune.

     LXIII.
To turn, — and to return; — the devil take it!
This story slips for ever through my fingers,
Because, just as the stanza likes to make it,
It needs must be, and so it rather lingers:
This form of verse began, I can't well break it,
But must keep time and tune like public singers;
But if I once get through my present measure,
I'll take another when I'm next at leisure.

     LXIV.
They went to the Ridotto ('tis a place
To which I mean to go myself to-morrow,
Just to divert my thoughts a little space,
Because I'm rather hippish, and may borrow,
Some spirits, guessing at what kind of face
May lurk beneath each mask; and as my sorrow
Slackens its pace sometimes, I'll make, or find,
Something shall leave it half an hour behind).

     LXV.
Now Laura moves along the joyous crowd,
Smiles in her eyes, and simpers on her lips;
To some she whispers, others speaks aloud;
To some she curtsies, and to some she dips,
Complains of warmth, and this complaint avow'd,
Her lover brings the lemonade, she sips;
She then surveys, condemns, but pities still
Her dearest friends for being dress'd so ill.

     LXVI.
One has false curls, another too much paint,
A third — where did she buy that frightful turban?
A fourth's so pale she fears she's going to faint,
A fifth's look's vulgar, dowdyish, and suburban,
A sixth's white silk has got a yellow taint,
A seventh's thin muslin surely will be her bane,
And lo! an eighth appears, — "I'll see no more!"
For fear, like Banquo's kings, they reach a score.

     LXVII.
Meantime, while she was thus at others gazing,
Others were leveling their looks at her;
She heard the men's half-whisper'd mode of praising,
And, till 'twas done, determined not to stir;
The women only thought it quite amazing
That, at her time of life, so many were
Admirers still, — but men are so debased,
Those brazen creatures always suit their taste.

     LXVIII.
For my part, now, I ne'er could understand
Why naughty women — but I won't discuss
A thing which is a scandal to the land,
I only don't see why it should be thus;
And if I were but in a gown and band,
Just to entitle me to make a fuss,
I'd preach on this till Wilberforce and Romilly
Should quote in their next speeches from my homily.

     LXIX.
While Laura thus was seen, and seeing, smiling,
Talking, she knew not why, and cared not what,
So that her female friends, with envy broiling,
Beheld her airs and triumph, and all that;
And well-dress'd males still kept before her filing,
And passing bow'd and mingled with her chat;
More than the rest one person seem'd to stare
With pertinacity that's rather rare.

     LXX.
He was a Turk, the colour of mahogany;
And Laura saw him, and at first was glad,
Because the Turks so much admire phylogyny,
Although their usage of their wives is sad;
'Tis said they use no better than a dog any
Poor woman, whom they purchase like a pad;
They have a number, though they ne'er exhibit 'em,
Four wives by law, and concubines: ad libitum."

     LXXI.
They lock them up, and veil, and guard them daily,
They scarcely can behold their male relations,
So that their moments do not pass so gaily
As is supposed the case with northern nations;
Confinement, too, must make them look quite palely;
And as the Turks abhor long conversations,
Their days are either pass'd in doing nothing,
Or bathing, nursing, making love, and clothing.

     LXXII.
They cannot read, and so don't lisp in criticism;
Nor write, and so they don't affect the muse;
Were never caught in epigram or witticism,
Have no romances, sermons, plays, reviews, —
In harams learning soon would make a pretty schism,
But luckily these beauties are no "Blues;"
No bustling Botherbys have they to show 'em
"That charming passage in the last new poem;"

     LXXIII.
No solemn, antique gentleman of rhyme,
Who having angled all his life for fame,
And getting but a nibble at a time,
Still fussily keeps fishing on, the same
Small "Triton of the minnows," the sublime
Of mediocrity, the furious tame,
The echo's echo, usher of the school
Of female wits, boy bards — in short, a fool!

     LXXIV.
A stalking oracle of awful phrase
The approving "Good!" (By no means good in law,)
Humming like flies around the newest blaze,
The bluest of bluebottles you e'er saw,
Teasing with blame, excruciating with praise,
Gorging the little fame he gets all raw,
Translating tongues he knows not even by letter,
And sweating plays so middling, bad were better.

     LXXV.
One hates an author that's all author, fellows
In foolscap uniforms turn'd up with ink,
So very anxious, clever, fine, and jealous,
One do'nt know what to say to them, or think,
Unless to puff them with a pair of bellows;
Of coxcombry's worst coxcombs e'en the pink
Are preferable to these shreds of paper,
These unquench'd snufflings of the midnight taper.

     LXXVI.
Of these same we see several, and of others,
Men of the world, who know the world like men,
Scott, Rogers, Moore, and all the better brothers,
Who think of something else besides the pen;
But for the children of the "mighty mother's,"
The would-be wits, and can't-be gentlemen,
I leave them to their daily "tea is ready,"
Smug coterie, and literary lady.

     LXXVII.
The poor dear Mussulwomen whom I mention
Have none of these instructive pleasant people,
And one would seem to them a new invention,
Unknown as bells within a Turkish steeple;
I think 't would almost be worth while to pension
(though best-sown projects very often reap ill)
A missionary author, just to preach
Our Christian usage of the parts of speech.

     LXXVIII.
No chemistry for them unfolds her gases,
No metaphysics are let loose in lectures,
No circulating library amasses
Religious novels, moral tales, and strictures
Upon the living manners, as they pass us;
No exhibition glares with annual pictures;
They stare not on the stars from out their attics,
Nor deal (thank God for that!) in mathematics.

     LXXIX.
Why I thank God for that is no great matter,
I have my reasons, you no doubt suppose,
And as, perhaps, they would not highly flatter,
I'll keep them for my life (to come) in prose;
I fear I have a little turn for satire,
And yet methinks the older that one grows
Inclines us more to laugh than scold, though laughter
Leaves us so doubly serious shortly after.

     LXXX.
Oh, mirth and innocence! Oh, milk and water!
Ye happy mixtures of more happy days!
In these sad centuries of sin and slaughter,
Abominable Man no more allays
His thirst with such pure beverage. No matter,
I love you both, and both shall have my praise;
Oh, for old Saturn's reign of sugar-candy! —
Meantime I drink to your return in brandy.

     LXXXI.
Our Laura's Turk still kept his eyes upon her,
Less in the Mussulman than Christian way,
Which seems to say, "Madam, I do you honour,
And while I please to stare, you'll please to stay!"
Could staring win a woman, this had won her,
But Laura could not thus be led astray;
She had stood fire too long and well, to boggle
Even at this stranger's most outlandish ogle.

     LXXXII.
The morning now was on the point of breaking
A turn of time at which I would advise
Ladies who have been dancing, or partaking
In any other kind of exercise,
To make their preparations for forsaking
The ball-room ere the sun begins to rise,
Because when once the lamps and candles fail,
His blushes make them look a little pale.

     LXXXIII.
I've seen some balls and revels in my time,
And stay'd them over for some silly reason,
And then I look'd (I hope it was no crime)
To see what lady best stood out the season,
And though I've seen some thousands in their prime,
Lovely and pleasing, and who still may please on,
I never saw but one (the stars withdrawn)
Whose bloom could after dancing dare the dawn.

     LXXXIV.
The name of this Aurora I'll not mention,
Although I might, for she was nought to me
More than that patent work of God's invention,
A charming woman, whom we like to see;
But writing names would merit reprehension,
Yet if you like to find out this fair she,
At the next London or Parisian ball
You still may mark her cheek out-blooming all.

     LXXXV.
Laura, who knew it would not do at all
To meet the daylight after seven hours' sitting
Among three thousand people at a ball,
To make her curtsy thought it right and fitting;
The Count was at her elbow with her shawl,
And they the room were on the point of quitting,
When lo! those cursed gondoliers had got
Just in the very place where they should not.

     LXXXVI.
In this they're like our coachmen, and the cause
Is much the same — the crowd, and pulling, hauling,
With blasphemies enough to break their jaws,
They make a never intermitted bawling.
At home, our Bow-street gemmen keep the laws,
And here a sentry stands within your calling;
But for all that, there is a deal of swearing,
And nauseous words past mentioning or bearing.

     LXXXVII.
The Count and Laura found their boat at last,
And homeward floated o'er the silent tide,
Discussing all the dances gone and past;
The dancers and their dresses, too, beside;
Some little scandals eke; but all aghast
(As to their palace-stairs the rowers glide)
Sate Laura by the side of her Adorer,
When lo! the Mussulman was there before her.

     LXXXVIII.
"Sir," said the Count, with brow exceeding grave,
"Your unexpected presence here will make
It necessary for myself to crave
Its import? But perhaps 'tis a mistake;
I hope it is so; and, at once to waive
All compliment, I hope so for your sake;
You understand my meaning, or you shall,"
"Sir" (quoth the Turk), "'tis no mistake at all:

     LXXXIX.
"That lady is my wife!" Much wonder paints
The lady's changing cheek, as well it might;
But where an Englishwoman sometimes faints,
Italian females don't do so outright;
They only call a little on their saints,
And then come to themselves, almost or quite;
Which saves much hartshorn, salts, and sprinkling faces,
And cutting stays, as usual in such cases.

     XC.
She said, — what could she say? Why, not a word:
But the Count courteously invited in
The stranger, much appeased by what he heard:
"Such things, perhaps, we'd best discuss within,"
Said he; "don't let us make ourselves absurd
In public, by a scene, nor raise a din,
For then the chief and only satisfaction
Will be much quizzing on the whole transaction."

     XCI.
They enter'd, and for coffee call'd — it came,
A beverage for Turks and Christians both,
Although the way they make it's not the same.
Now Laura, much recover'd, or less loth
To speak, cries "Beppo! what's your pagan name?
Bless me! your beard is of amazing growth!
And how came you to keep away so long?
Are you not sensible 't was very wrong?

     XCII.
"And are you really, truly, now a Turk?
With any other women did you wive?
Is 't true they use their fingers for a fork?
Well, that's the prettiest shawl — as I'm alive!
You'll give it me? They say you eat no pork.
And how so many years did you contrive
To — Bless me! did I ever? No, I never
Saw a man grown so yellow! How's your liver?

     XCIII.
"Beppo! that beard of yours becomes you not;
It shall be shaved before you're a day older:
Why do you wear it? Oh! I had forgot —
Pray don't you think the weather here is colder?
How do I look? You shan't stir from this spot
In that queer dress, for fear that some beholder
Should find you out, and make the story known.
How short your hair is! Lord! how grey it's grown!"

     XCIV.
What answer Beppo made to these demands
Is more than I know. He was cast away
About where Troy stood once, and nothing stands;
Became a slave of course, and for his pay
Had bread and bastinadoes, till some bands
Of pirates landing in a neighbouring bay,
He join'd the rogues and prosper'd, and became
A renegado of indifferent fame.

     XCV.
But he grew rich, and with his riches grew so
Keen the desire to see his home again,
He thought himself in duty bound to do so,
And not be always thieving on the main;
Lonely he felt, at times, as Robin Crusoe,
And so he hired a vessel come from Spain,
Bound for Corfu: she was a fine polacca,
Mann'd with twelve hands, and laden with tobacco.

     XCVI.
Himself, and much (Heaven knows how gotten!) cash,
He then embark'd, with risk of life and limb
And got clear off, although the attempt was rash;
He said that Providence protected him —
For my part, I say nothing — lest we clash
In our opinions: — well, the ship was trim,
Set sail, and kept her reckoning fairly on,
Except three days of calm when off Cape Bonn.

     XCVII.
They reach'd the island, he transferr'd his lading
And self and live stock to another bottom,
And pass'd for a true Turkey-merchant, trading
With goods of various names, but I've forgot'em.
However, he got off by this evading,
Or else the people would perhaps have shot him;
And thus at Venice landed to reclaim
His wife, religion, house, and Christian name.

     XCVIII.
His wife received, the patriarch re-baptised him
(He made the church a present, by the way);
He then threw off the garments which disguised him,
And borrow'd the Count's small clothes for a day:
His friends the more for his long absence prized him,
Finding he'd wherewithal to make them gay,
With dinners, where he oft became the laugh of them,
For stories — but I don't believe the half of them.

     XCIX.
Whate'er his youth had suffer'd, his old age
With wealth and talking made him some amends;
Though Laura sometimes put him in a rage,
I've heard the Count and he were always friends.
My pen is at the bottom of a page,
Which being finish'd, here the story ends;
'Tis to be wish'd it had been sooner done,
But stories somehow lengthen when begun. 