

thROUGH infinite, eternal space 'twas night

And darkness : scarcely the blue lightning shone. As, flashing idly thro' its harmless flight, It lit discordant elements alone. Oblivion spread its vast long limbs, with sullen pride. Midst the loved, changeless shades, that every thing could hide; No speck of beauty, sparkling there on high.

As some meek flower, that breaks the snow to shine, No sun sail'd, like a ship, across the sky, A startling show of pomp and power divine.

Then sounds alone, like Etna's breathings, broke

Upon the wilder'd ear of Seraphim, And seem'd as if the presence they bespoke Of one who mock'd at God and scoff'd at him. For element 'gainst element was loudly warring. And latent flames, and waves, and rocks, were broken jarring ; Then were unknown fair music's magic power. The still soft sounding of the speaking wave. The rolling erash of clouds, that proudly lower As if the Almighty used the voice they gave.

III.

Soon as created. Angels trembling stood,

To hear the chaos loud, with 'palling sound Of stormy elements a mingling flood,

Strike 'gainst its shore, and strike but to rebound ; Its huge waves, rushing, met the presence of a God, And weakening strove in vain, where'er his footsteps trod : Seraphs, Dominions, Powers created rose.

Then fled, impetuous, to their maker's breast ;

Trembling they crouch'd, and wilder'd fancied foes

Would lift from out the huge abyss their crest.

Bending and mute, with agitated eye,

And trembling limbs, and pallid cheeks and lips. The Angels tow'rds the Godhead troubled fly, As fore the raging storm men's crowding ships. Hastening around their God, haggard they clung, they prest ; Alone, beaming serene, upon his face, were signs of rest. Thus can the shepherd, when the forest near

Echoes the howling wolf's loud lengthening bay. Sleep undismayed, the while his sheep, with fear, Wilder'd look routid and know not where to stay.

V.

He saw their fear. Reclined beneath his throne. Wrapt in his garments, sleeping Mercy wakes ; She moves, and sound is still, confusion gone ;

Whilst heavenly music, soft, slow, stealing breaks Upon the doubting sense of reassured crowds. From spheres that, rolling now, no darkness shrouds. God will'd, and space, though infinite, was still ;

A thousand, then ten thousand orbs appear'd Rolling in light, obedient to his will ;

His will tliey sought, his guiding breath rrvorod

Faint (ype, the sun, that sudden splendent breaks

The canopy of black beleaguer'd clouds, That darken o'er the earth : while Vengeance wreaks

The human wrongs of him whom nature shrouds ; While shaking mountains fear the flashing thunder's hate, And Nature fainting seems to sink beneath her fate. Sudden its beam, at once, may give to sight

The wave that sparkles in the sailor's way. The glittering foliage nodding in its light,

The smiling rock that reddens in its ray.

VII.

Still what are these ? They are but earthly show !

To Angels then vast infinite was one ! And can aught bright compare of here below

With these young orbs, all dancing round their sun And slowly rising into space, that knew not time, As summer's golden orb unto a Lapland clime ?

With that bright show, not e'en that East compares,

When glorious, calling man from fear and rest, The sun rouses the russet dawn, and tears The wintry veil from Nature's snowy breast

Caught by the sound, attracted by the scene

That breaks upon his sense with virgin light, As if a hand had drawn the liiding screen

And shown all nature to his wilder'd sight, A Cherub spreads his wings, a moment doubting stands, Then sudden laughs and springs and flutters o'er new lands ; Then thronging Angels his bright track pursue.

As birds, whose leader o'er the Asiatic plain, Where torrents spread their waters to the view,

In varying line conducts a noisy train.

Then seem'd each Seraph but a sportive child.

To w horn her mother shows the robe of spring ; By flowers, sparkling with dew, she runs beguiled,

And hope and pleasure seem her feet to w ing ; Charm'd by the various hue, at last, she doubtful stands And feasts her eager eyes forgetful of her hands. Thus sped each Seraph o'er the shining fields.

Lured by the orbs that move in splendid strife j Unknowing which to wliicli in beauty yields.

Hovering, they wake new worlds to sounds of life

Yet all was barren ; nothing but a stream

Of splendent suns and stars attracts the sight : Mingling, they deckt each other with a gleam,

Each caught its beauty from its brother's light. But, by the grateful sight of seraphs' joy beguiled, Jehovah, pleased, look'd on his vast work and smiled Then suddenly they see the planets move.

They see, upon the barren glittering earth. The bending corn, the forests, nodding grove.

And Avorlds and oceans teeming one great birth.
Clje Citation of dje ijumanJTorm*

What tongue shall say whtre the Almighty's throned?

Where, in his silent majesty and power, He wields the sceptre, with no jewels stoned. But with a sun, that forms the summit's flower ? Where, brilliant with his crown of various sparkling star, His head, rear'd into space, looks down upon the Car ? An eagle's eye may gaze on founts of light,

A mole's may pierce the earth's obscurity ; No mortal eye has gain'd the dazzling sight Of groat Jehovah in his purity
XII.

Hardly the Angels gaze upon his brow,

When, falling prostrate 'neath his footstool's shade, They pray that he should veil the awful show Of splendent power, that causes sight to fade. lie gathers murky shades of thickest darkness round. And crowding mists, to form the Godhead's veil, are found ; But, as the sun, e'en thro' the gathering cloud,

That lifts its fleecy mass on some huge rock, Pierces the envious, the life-hiding shroud, So majesty its thickening veil doth mock.

No Angel raised his humble bending head j

But one great voice burst from each beating breast : Not such the thunders, when the storm is led.

Midst echoing rocks,- from the high mountain's crest. It fiU'd the firmament, and, borne upon the breeze Of thousand planets, echoed o'er their splashing seas. At once the voice of birds joiu'd in the sound,

Learning the song, with which they, after night. Have since call'd Nature, in sleep's thraldom bound. To wake and view God's purest emblem light

'• 0 Power ! known but by works, that show thy will

Omnipotent, we have pursued thy breath, Amidst the spheres, which e'en vast space can fill

AVith gems, that form unto each sun a Avreath, Thy beams, too powerful for Angels' weaker sight, Sent from thy gladdening brow, afford the suns <h(ir light. The suns bestow upon each circling earth

A portion of their pride, reflecting rays. From which these orbs give forth one various birth.

And life springs forth and decks fair heaven's ways.

" The huge behemoth, troubling all the sea,

The ant, that treads the moveless grain of sand, The mountain, snatching from the clouds, that flee

Across the heaven, the weapons of their hand. Seek not their good alone ; b\it all thy wondrous works Shield or protect each other, whene'er danger lurks. They all within their narrow sphere can show

The hand of Him that gave them living force ; Within the very rocks there seems to glow

Reflection of some beam, from their first source
" We, we alone first creatures of thy will,

More deckt with strength and power and various grace, Seem but to live for self; but self mayn't fill

The heart, wherein thy kindling power we trace. Thy touch is love, and mercy dwells within thy breast, Tempering the will, that waked the world from fitful rest, O sovereign Power ! but will that we obtain

Our share in acting what thy nature loves ; Then happiness will be thy servants' gain.

Whene'er thy smile our humbler work approves."

As lilies that for days have drooping hung,

Scorch'd up, await the clouds, that bid them pine, So these ne'er raised their heads, but having sung. Yet prostrate lay and wait the word divine. Within their breasts was hope ; but fear and anxious doubt Strode, dancing, round their hearts, mingling their sickening When, sudden as the child who fears the voice [shouts :

Of its kind mother, if some fault is done. Let her but smile, e'en quickly can rejoice. So Angels woke to joy ; their hopes are won

A voice, as of ten thousand organs, rose

Swelling from the soft note to the loud sound That rivals thunder, when the anthems close

With notes that, struck from the groin'd roof, rebound. The mists went rolling from the face of sovereign power, Driven by his breath, they broke, and veil'd the God no more ; Beneath his feet, the new-born fabric shook.

And chaos beat against high heaven's walls ; As lashing wave, whene'er a bank is broke,

Exulting at the thought of foe that falls.

The Godhead spoke, and all his works were still.

As the poor shipwreck, on a lonely rock, Round which the ocean steals, knows fear and chill,

Whene'er the raging waves break with loud shock ; But if at length a ship in the far mist he spies. He joys, and o'er the seas are echoed his wild cries ; So Nature felt, chaotic Ocean raged.

And round her form his misshaped arms he threw ; The voice assured her, and, her fears assuaged,

She joy'd, while backwards trembling Chaos flew
^' Angels ! you shall have beings io protect;

But know, that, where the power of ill is given, If good come thence, e'en thrones you must erect, And you from lofty primacy are driven ; For virtue, higher than all power, mocks at the show That strength may seem to give, or pomp or aught bestow." He said, and to the earth he, stooping, took

Clay from the river's bed, and form'd a man Wanting a soul, although the form partook Of majesty like that which Angels scan.
CfjeiFalloftfjeSfngels.

The form, created, lay upon a bank

Gemm'd with the fragrant flowers of infant spring, Shelter' d by trees, whose leaves from fountains drank That slowly murmur'd stillness whispering. Upon his brow it seem'd that majesty asleep, Upon his lips that graces hung iu slumbers deep. The dark long hair upon the tranquil breast ; The pencil'd eyelash, breaking with its line The quiet cheek, where roses seem'd to rest ; The limbs seem'd all with innocence to shine
When virtue's struggle ends, and taunts are vain ;

When all the world's inflictions can no more ; When virtue gains a refuge from all pain,

And pure has run its course on this wild shore ; When stormy manhood sinks, as infancy was born, With smiles of peace, unstain'd, tho' e'en by passion torn ; Then even death may wear that pleasing look

This form then bore, when, fresh from God's fair hand, That smile, as if the dead of rest, partook

Without a triumph o'er th' oppressive band.

Jehovah spoke, and bade the bending choirs

Now raise their heads and view the form of man, That form, which animate to heaven aspires

And seeks eternity and God to scan ; That form, which by its act may gain the lofty seat, Where virtue is secure reward and joys to meet. They stood erect and eager look'd around ;

They gazed below, thinking midst stars to see Some being fluttering o'er the azure ground,

Deckt in the gayest glittering panoply 
Then turn'd their eyes upon the ocean's space,

Thinking some form might meet their anxious sight, Playing with its oft deeply dimpled face, Or struggling with its Avaves in equal fight ; Then on the Alps, the lofty Andes, fixt they gazed, Thinking he play'd with lightnings that their summit grazed. But, when, stretcht out, they saw the weakly frame. Wondering they view'd, e'en by amazement won ; Then, bowing meekly, thousands backwards came. And at God's throne sung out " Thy will be done."

But one, midst others, radiant with gold scales. That cover'd all his frame, brilliant to sight, With two huge wings, that flap the perfumed gales, Bearing such hues as pass'd the iris'd light. Hovering, at length stood sudden on the loaded earth, And, laughing, thus address'd the crowd with cheating mirth: *' Is this the form that we must serve and guide ?

Must we forget the paths of brilliant skies. And stand for ever by this mortal's side.

While he to gain our seats, our birthright tries 
" Who has e'er seen the lordly lion care

The reptile shaking at his awful brow ? Who has e'er seen the lofty oak to share

The trembling fears the reed alone may know ? . Shall we, whose flight can reach the presence of a God, Shall we depend on such a feeble worldling's nod ?" E'en as he spoke, loud murmurings arose,

And whisperings of discontent and spite ; As each to each his grief, his trouble shows,

Gradually shouts rise to heaven's height.

The sound, circling the throne, threw wild dismay

And horror to the breasts of bending choirs. The thunders broke from where they sleeping lay ;

The angry lightnings flash'd with forked fires ; The clouds, the footstool, and the throne, indignant shook, While God into his hand his golden balance took. Trembling, the Angels hid beneath their wings

Their quailing brows, and only lowly cried " Mercy ! " The beam the scale of mercy flings

High to the heavens, and their cause is tried
The earth shook trembling from the East to West ;

The giant ocean lash'd its bounds with ire ; The clouds Hew rapid from the azure breast

And show'd the offending children to their sire. God will'd : with anxious haste the myriads instant fly To bring their brothers fore the insulted deity. la vain they plead the Godhead's mercies shown,

In vain they plead the sinner's hope secure : When once the soul the thorn of vice has known,

Nought but its bitter fruits the wound can cure.

XXIX.

A mighty struggle and a fight arose ;

War now disturbs the earth's unbroken rest; A mighty river waves and foam oft throws Against a rock, rebounding from its breast j So, for a time, the Angels' dreadful strife was vain ; No one could o'er the other any vantage gain. Their huge spread limbs in dreadful contact came

And struggling fell, enclasp'd, upon the ground ; The mountains shook, beams of the world's vast frame, They seem'd to sink and creaking yield around.
Their shouts, their cries of triumph and of pain

Mock'd Etna's throes, when, heaving all its mass,

It frights mankind. Their blood, one bright vast stain

Spreads o'pr the mead and reddens all the grass.

But what is strength, against that smile the heavens bestow

On those within whose breast is known great virtue's glow ?

Arm'd by such spell, the weak can shame the strong,

The simple fool can baffle e'en the sage : These ministers of God ne'er battled long,

But chain'd the foes who battle dared to wage.
SECTION IV.

^\)t Sfnimation of i^an*

To leave the forms on which they placed their pride,

To seek the human frame they scofF'd at now, And there, unknowing of the past reside, Living and dying, while long ages flow. Until, tho' knowing evil, good should he ohtain'd ; Such was the milder sentence God for these ordain'd. And lifeless, first, the beauteous spoil is seen

Of him who urged them rashly to the deed ; While man's arose from olF the flowery green, Fired with a soul that mock'd such idle weed
The Angels gazed, then sang the mercied word That gave their brothers hope of future rest, And hastening fly and anxiously afford

Their guardian power, gainst man's tumultuous breast. Showing the love that sway'd th' omnipotence divine, They hoped, at once, to place man in his now lost shrine. The demons too, for such they now became,

Tainted by evil and rebellious guilt, Round the light form in thickening numbers came, And strove to break the hopes the Angels built.

XXXIII.

Man rose : his dark black eye gleam'd from its nesl,

And seem'd, with thirst, to drink the glorious sight ;

Wonder and awe went revelling in his breast ;

He seem'd as drunk with such excess of light.

He moved, and from the shade of trees burst on his eyes

That orb, fore whom e'en fear with night for ever flies.

He look'd, till his sight fail'd, then strove to hide,

With his soft hands, the vision from his gaze ; But still it seem'd as if the streaming tide

Of beams burst thro' the veil by unknown ways
xxxrr.

At last again he look'd ; the waving trees,

The thronging flowers sprinkled o'er the earth, The blossoms wanton on the playful breeze,

Forming a bath of odour I'ound his birth. The sparkling waters gilt like moving waves of gold. The azure sky, fore which the clouds their crimson hold. All caught, in turns, his now bewilder'd mind ;

He watch'd the sun sink glorious in the west; Then turn'd himself, and was amazed to find

That o'er tlie whole was drawn a darkening vest.

E'en like a child, he grieved to lose the show

Of gaudy colours glittering on the sky. Of light, gay sparkling on the waters flow ; He fear'd it was a dream, that thus could fly. He laid him down, fatigued he sunk to peaceful sleep, And there imagined his, what erst he could not keep. The moon was pausing midway, taking rest,

When, wakening into sense, he felt the peace That night can breathe upon the human breast With the mild ray of its light starry fleece
Till now his bosom, bustling with its thought,

View'd nature only as a splendid show, That might reward the eye whose glance it caught ;

But gave not to the soul aught else to know. Now, that nocturnal stillness silenced all the sound Of nature, save the voice which can within resound. He felt a struggling, which oppres'd his heart

With sickening eagerness, that e'en seem'd vain, From thought and all that press'd on thought to part,

And some communion with the world to gain.

All was yet still, the stream murmur'd alone.

And spoke of time, while silence touch'd the earth When on the path of day, by morning shown,

The sun came riding in his car of mirth. And as he paced, he changed the dew-beweeping sky Into a bride treading on gems of revelry. Adam fell down, and form'd at last a voice

That bursting said " Thy power indeed is great." Hardly he spoke, when all with him rejoice,

The breezes, birds, all that has tongue to greet.
XXXVIIT.

Lured by the sounds that from the woodlands seem,

He trod the wood's bewildering winding ways, Caught on the fanning breeze a pleasing dream, Of nature answering, with affection's lays. To his heart's craving, and his speech with hers did float, Until he found she always answer'd the same note. Until he saw that every beast m ith haste

Flew from his steps, and own'd no other mate Than one on whom its lineaments were traced : Then he bewail'd his miserable fate.

" Am I alone, like yonder orb of speed,

To run round this wide world, a grieving form Unmatcht, unfriended, while no one shall heed, Lost in their joys, my soul's afflicting storm ? The lion and the emmet, and the wandering breeze Find all a fondling mate, whom with their love they please ; But my hoarse voice finds but the echo's tone,

That gives me sounds ; it speaks my words again, But answers not, and I am still alone,"

E'en such until he slept his mournful strain
SECTION V.

C!)e Citati0u of moimn, antJ ti)t Mi ot0im.

But what is that which stands before his sight,

A wakening dream of beauty and of joy ? Aroused he rises, wilder'd with delight,

One object seems his every thought t' employ. Heaven's gift, a lovely woman, stands before his feet, And with entrancing presence makes his sorrows fleet. She seems, and is, sufficient to outweigh

E'en hell's inflictions ; Iris to his heart, She 'twixt despair and heaven reflects a ray

Of God, and seems his presence to impart
XI.I.

There is a power in beauty, that will bless ;

Tho' man resist, when woman's snnlike smile Breaks on his passions, he is bitterless.

And seems, at once, unconscious of all guile. The peasant muttering looks upon the battling clouds, But cheers, whene'er the sun his joyful brow unshrouds ; And man, sickening with pain, by anguish driven.

Looking regretful on the hopes he rear'd. Which suddenly by despair's fell touch are riven,

Raises his head and laughs by woman chear'd.

XLII.

Her sparkling eye sends forth such dazzling light,

He deems it sprung from those encircling beams That deck some being, with high splendour bright.

Who sends us hope, on these reflected gleams, To say, he soon, in all his radiant brilliance deckt. Will forth and realize what fancy dreams uncheckt. When God gave woman to man's restless heart.

It seem'd as if such gift, at once, should chain And e'en to virtue bind him ne'er to part ;

But not, for her, can he from guilt refrain
For evil has such poAver, that e'en with Man,

Heaven's brightest gift but tempts the more his will To crowd with every wrong his short-lived span,

Until perchance his death the measure fill. E'en now to Man was given a smile-creating bride. Who placed on him her love and in Ws joy her pride, Whose tender limbs, that seem for weakness framed.

Shun no fatigue, but oftener shun repose. In search of what man's wantonness has claim'd,

Until e'en blood doth stain her brighter snows.

Now, tired at length of fondling and of love.

He looks upon the sun, and wishes glow That he might guide the car its spirit drove, And view what earth can give to sight below. He climb'd the moantain's top, and sought the giant hand That threw its lightnings thence upon the quailing land. He sought in the dark cavern's murky depth.

Passing the beams tliat bear the world's mass'd wall, The demon raising the sick earth with breath That dims all heaven and makes nature pall
While Eve went mourning o'er her widow'd heart,

Wandering o'er hill and far far spreading wood, She caird on him, who would ere morn depart

And not regard her charms, her sorrow's flood. Mourning she went, unconscious of the lengthening way. Until she saw a tree all sparkling in the day.

Its bright green leaves e'en half reveal'd half hid

Fair fruits, that seem'd to blush and seek the shade. As virgin does, who in great haste has bid

Her veil to fall, which, lingering, has betrayed.

It was the Tree of knowledge and of life,

Which they, forbid'n to taste, had ne'er approach'd ; The fruitful dew, that touch'd its leaves, fell rife, And plants sprung up and on its boughs encroach'd. Breathless, alarm'd that her unconscious steps had trod So near the spot where stood what was forbid'n by God, She was about to turn ; when from the tree

A voice came forth, with sounds so soft and sweet, That she entranced stood still : from terror free. She felt a hope some blessing sprite to meet.
The leaves are rustling, and at last appears

A form glittering with scales of thousand lights ; Slowly its pointed head it lofty rears,

And thus with words deceives, with hope delights : *' 0 Mother of a race that on the future throws A spell, and power o'er all thro' which life eddying flows ! O first alike in beauty and in race !

God's proudest work, decking the flowery earth With what e'en heaven might adorn and grace !

Fairest enchantress ! creature of light mirth !

' ' Why should you sigh and grieve alone below ?

Is it because your lover stays away. And seeks to pierce the hidden cause's flow ?

Then change at once your darkness into day. This fruit, that seems, denying, half to woo the sight, At once lifts up the veil that shuts his eyes from light. That you might show your love unto your mate.

By daring ill to fall upon your head. Made God forbid this tree ; on you now wait

Your husband's hopes ; they soon for e'er are fled
The demon, lurkiug in the serpent's coil,

Spoke cheating thus; and Eve, with hurried pace, Rush'd to the tree and fell within his toil.

Then flash'd his eye M'ith pride, with joy his face. " Now may the wondrous God, who boasts his sovereign power, Own me his foe ; nor let his brow contemptuous lower, If I too boast, who've mock'd his kind intent

Of making us in human forms reside. And there do penance and in tears repent,

For what we did when sitting by his side."

L.

The serpent's hollow coil fell lifeless down. —

On Adam and on Eve's mind sickening burst The certainty of toil and sickness, shown In a dead vision, where they seemed curst. And where Envy, Revenge and Malice sporting danced Around a bloody form, that seem'd in thought entranced. While, looking upon weapons black with gore.

Its silent finger beckon'd Love and Hate To come and take; from the red muddy iloor A dagger to fulfill the bitter fate.

ENJ) OF THE FlUST CA.VTO
SECTION I.

Cije Deluge*

Ages had pass'd, and the proud sun, unchanged,

Still o'er the world, with undiminish'd light. Circling the heavens, with youthful ardour ranged,

Like Alpine bird just springing to its flight. Day after day, as, with his life-bestowing power [flower.

Removed and bless'd night's heavenly lamp, earth's humblest He seem'd, a dread reproach to passing men,

With giant finger, anxiously to show Their mockery of God to nature's ken.

That she might rise and let her anger flow
At length, the hour approach'd, when Justice led

To punish man, (for he had fill'd his act,) Saw Mercy plead no more, hut hide her head

And mourn ; while Vengeance all its terrors slack'd. The children of the Earth now gaily trod the dance, And scoffing laugh'd and mock'd at Heaven's angry glance. " What is this God, who patient bears our taunts.

Our insults and our wrongs ? Is he so kind That e'en he seeks to hide within his haunts. And so forgive because he e'en is blind ?"

But, while security within their hearts

Slept, and look'd not for danger or. for ill ; Vengeance the solid rocks, e'en cleaving, parts ;

The waters of the abyss obey her will. GurgUn§, from the inmost depths, forth they come tumbling out, Bubbling they rush in waves eddying round about. The lofty heaven's bright firmament seems split.

Opening a dam, and shows a stagnant pool. Moving, after long years, in angry fit ;

Its banks against the breath of God can't rule.
Now echoed back, by the dread vault that bears

The weight of chaos stamping at its check, Rise up the shouts of men ; their wildering fears Are now for life, amidst their country's wreck. Their sleepless eyes seem starting, in their wild amaze To see an ocean tread the valley's secret maze. Then, as the crowded mass of some vast town

Steps on the rising ground, with heightening feet, And on the wide abyss looks trembling down.

From thousands at each step shrieks mingling meet.

Although the sun is risen, it seems as night ;

Hardly are seen the faces of mankind; And they are such, they seem the eyes to blight Of friends, who by some gleam each other find. Hunger has alter'd many, terror and despair And wolf.eycd conscience alter more with racking care. The rustling rain, that, dropping now no more,

Comes in unbroken lines upon their heads. Narrows with darkening flood their straighten'd shore, And soon the stronger on the weaker treads
TI.

The outmost crowd, space for a time can gain ;

For in the midst, some, fainting into death, Fall and are trampled on, and lose the pain

And anguish waiting on the other's breath. At length, their shouts are over, silently they bide, Dismay'd and speechless; with their heads fixt turn'd aside, Listening to the boisterous ocean's splash.

Trembling they stand. Mothers alone now hold Another to the breast, daring the crash ;

Husbands and lovers their weak arms unfold.

The putrid heap, beneath the strong man's feet,

With yielding sliding mass, foul traps can spread, Against the boasting in his life. There meet

In close embrace the living and the dead. Heaving with strength and rising from the enclasped bride, Yon giant-limb'd struggles, but crowds can mock his pride ; The crowds above can force a close embrace,

And, sickening, fainting, but yet struggling still, He sinks, he sinks, and touches the cold face

Of one he loved, but loathes against his will
There is a break upon the far spread cloud,

And men who watch the angry ocean's splash Raise up their heads. Light, Light breaks thro' its shroud,

And falls upon the world as lightnings flash. The vaulting clouds roll on ; this solitary beam Like God's long finger moves, and its far-marking gleam Seems circling every spot, and pointing out

Waves, waves, waves, waters, and white distant foam ; The eyes of millions follow it about ;

It shows the abyss, then fades, no more to roam.

Now the slow breaking waves (as sickle's sweep

Bears down the outmost of the corn's throng'd mass) Take down whole lines into the green-eyed deep. And often o'er the rest quick splashing pass. A vainly darting arm, some moments struggles, long Battling the ruthless waves, for agony is strong. A shuddering cry is heard, before the rush

Of some long wave, that curls upon its prey : But most fall down, as leaves, silent and hush, Forced down to death by e'en the lightest spray
One great in strength, confiding in his power,

Plunges at once and seeks another shore ; A high rock beetles o'er the waves, as tower

That rising lofty views the earth's vast floor, lie swims, he strives, he reaches the hard scraggy rock, He climbs and falls; the waves beyond his hopes still mock. A camel thus, upon the Syrian plain,

When whispering hope bears to its ear the sound Of freshing fount, hastens its pace to gain

The spot, but, cheated, dead falls on the ground.

The last of all, a phrensied form is seen,

Listening and laughing, as she hears the foam Gurgling around the rocks she sits between ;

She sits amidst the dead, as midst her home. Her hands seem grasping image of the pleased mind, She joys caressing what no other there could find. The sea has pass'd the rocks, and buoyant forms,

Borne on their swelling airs, now float aiO ind; Oft such are seen round fisher's bark, when storms

Have luislrd that hurl'd earth's girding ships to ground
And lo ! a corpse borne slow into her sight !

The mother rushes, seizes on the child, Hugs her to wither'd breasts, with wild affright. And now no Iqnger laughs by cheats beguiled. But Avildly while the green pale form she clasps, she screams And shrieks, as the long, rushing, sounding white wave gleams, Bringing her fear, lest, wash'd again for aye,

The corpse fall from her hand into its grave. It comes, with the fierce wind ; she leaps to die And perish too in the child. snatching wave
SECTION II.

CJe Ji3atitjitp of f esus.

XIII.

Man's race^ swept from the earth in sight of those

Whom God in pity saved, was not enough To make the human breast, that evil knows,

Seek the good path, that seems so harsh and rough. Thorns cutting deep the flesh, stones with sharp edges thrown On the straight path, are yet as evil beacons shown ; And children, caught by the gay flower's blow,

By the mild breath of zephyrs, that arise

And cause the heart with wantonness to glow.

Too soon the surer road to good despise.
God moved by those, who, guardians of the race,

Attempt to steer, upon the stormy sea Of Man's rude passions, threw upon the space Of darkening clouds the rainbow's sign of glee. This shown, Man needs not dread the wide earth-sweeping rage Of waters breaking loose his anger to assuage. Yet Justice claims atonement for the wrong ;

Though Mercy pleads, she cannot from his breast Efface the just, and suff'ring must belong

To crimes, that Justice well atoned may rest.

My tongue, that until now seem'd confident.

And has thus sung the works and wrongs of Heaven, Now fails. Unless some inspiration sent

From the liigh power assist, to silence driven. It may not hope to speak the attributes divine ; For e'en God's love must glow, must burn in every lino ; That love, which for his creatures brought to eartji The sovereign of the heavens, that he might show (The expiation paid in mortal birth) The mercy that within did ever glow.
O thou ! who with thy wheels pausing from sound,

That mingling in soft harmony ascends And eddies, echoed by the planets round

To heaven, where with its brother notes it blends, O thou ! who w ith a brow of light look'dst from above And saw'st descending, on the meek-rayed wings of love, God to a virgin's womb, inspire my lay !

Thou canst wake life in things inanimate. O waken in my breast, with thy kind ray, First love, then power such mercies to relate.

The golden gates of heaven flew open wide ;

Then passes, messenger unto the world, A power ; at once upon the azure tide

On wings, far stretching, like great sails unfurl'd. He springs ; unclosed a moment yet the gates remain'd, While cherubs, peeping, sight of the earth's joy obtain'd, And the far-smiling ocean felt a breath

Loaded with odours from the censer's fume, Play on its waves, as lover, from the wreath Of virgin mistress, feels the inhaled perfume
Then creaking on their brazen hinge, they shut,

While the bright messenger reflects a ray Of gladness on shamed poverty 's foul hut,

As fluttering through the heavens he wends his May. At length, upon the Libyan desert, footing ground, He shakes his glorious wings, and shaking throws around The dew collected midst the smiling skies,

AVhich rears amidst the lurid parched sands An Oasis, and water'd palms arise, A verdant isle amidst the Ocean lands.

XIX.

Thence with one stride he on Judjea trod.

Seeking the humble cabin of the maid, lie found her modest, thinking of her God,

Amidst the youthful spring's returning shade. Ilcr eyes, at sound of man, (from such she deem'd the voice,) Sought the low ground ; she fear'd, though call'd but to rejoice '- Hail, Mary '. For thy Lord is now with thee

And shadows thee ; and thou, midst women blest, Shalt cause the evil power from man to flee,

Which now forbids his soul in heaven to rest."
He said ; and God within [wr womb conceived.

Days, months, e'en pass'd ; when he by angels borne Came to the earth, and she, from pain relieved,

Brought forth her Lord, of all his splendour shorn.

His awful brow sublime put on an infant's smile :

Commanding all, it now a mother would beguile.

Within a manger, when the wind blew hard.

And bore its heavy sleet unto the ground.

The Infant babe midst cattle humbly fared,

While haughty man 'gainst cold a palace found.

When born, the attendant angels clustering flew,

Order'd to leave him, and await him there, Where stands an empty throne, from which love drew

Heaven's majesty a mortal's veil to share. As their light mingling wings sparkled in the sun's ray, Their mass appear' d a star that trod the Eastern way. And kings and shepherds, guided by its light.

Rose from their couch to follow the fair sign, That promised, as the morning star to night.

Unto their souls, a sun of power benign.
They found the child, and, falling at his feet,

Adore their God ; for, e'en inspired, they know That more of power than human sight can meet Belong'd to him, thus veil'd in human show. But now the demons rise, from their but seeming trance To see their king descend ; they wake, with haughty glance They scoffing mock his miserable fare.

Whispering, to man their fell intent inspire, And make him once again their hatred share

'Gainst God, who with his love their breasts would fire
SECTION III.

Cije suffering jHeUiatton of ^otr»

As some wild flower, borne from the blossom'd tree,

Plays on its mother's breath of rich perfume And wanton circles on the wind, though free, Allured unto its parent stem and bloom ; Until the rough blast come, that wafts it far away, And brings a stormy end unto its brightening day ; So the fair child, our Saviour, played around And seem'd to joy a mother's tender care, Until his mission urged : then from the ground He was quick torn, his torturings to bear.
An exile wandering from place to place.

The son of God found not a sheltering roof; The sparrow and the swallow none will chase

From where they dM oil ; yet God gave no reproof. But bearing all, the sick, the wounded and the dead He raised, and dried the tears that man in grief must shed. Taunts and reviliiigs, dangers and distress,

Desertion from his friends, mockery from foes, He doom'd himself to bear, and yet could bless The very heart that with fell malice glows.

E'en while he knew that, flying from his sight,

Apostles should desert him in his need. He strove to soothe, to make their peril light,

And smiled on him who swore that he would bleed Ere he would leave a sire so mild, so meek, so kind, KnoAving he should deny him thrice before maukiud. With him who sold him to his bitter fate,

Remorseless, (as the lamb caress'd and fed. Nurtured by children for a playful mate.

Is to the knife,) he broke and bless'd his bread
Judas ! When Satan enter'd in thy heart,

Choosing thee out as minister below, To prove himself but second in his part,

What sign was stampt upon thy human brow ? Did murder bask in thine eye, revel on thy lip E'en visible to sight, or could he passing dip Into thy heart, where envy reign'd secure,

And traced its deepening lines so legible, As if no shame a veil could e'er procure

To hide with shade, what was indelible ?

See I wliere he stands, upon his brow flow down

Drops of his blood, and men can laugh at this ! Laugh at that sceptre, at that thorny crown, Bestow'd at sign of him who gave the kiss ! See where a man clothed in his brief tho' gorgeous show Stands pointing w ith a sneer, then strikes a bitter blow. Hark at that cry ! 'Tis Barabbas it calls ;

A robber is preferr'd, and mercy 's shown The thief; while man's bitterness leaping falls

On him, who leaves for them great heaven's throne
XXVIII.

' How can I speak the rest ! The rocks spoke out ; They burst, trammels of nature's sleeping soul, They burst, indignant, and man's bones about

Were strewn, and men's ghosts were cast forth as foul, Poisoning the eartli and ocean's vainly washing wave ; And heaven refused its liglit, and hiding darkness gave: The moon shuddering, averting her bright face, Look'd on the sun, and hid from his pale eye The dreadful sight. God said with mercied grace, " They know not what they do ;" then sunk to die.

One man was by his side. Three women stood And wept; they dared before his foes to vveep And show their love. As the wild torrent flood Oft sweeps away into its whirling deep The bolder rock, that rears its hardy daring crest. And, 'gainst its waves struggling, presents its time-worn breast But oft it meets a lowly plant, that bends

Before its passing weight, then lifts its head And smiles upon the wave : So woman lends

A pliant form, but man is broke by terror's tread
At length a man is roused, and seeks the ground

Ou which God died : careful he takes him down, Bathes with pure balm and swathes his body round, And then removes the yet adhering crown. The women help him in his last sad pious care. And with him all the pain and all the labour share. Convey'd at length, as if a mortal tomb

Could hold a God, unto a rocky cave, They who still doubted, placed around the womb

Of earth some guards ; they thought his power to brave.

XXXI.

How beauteous the night when he arose !

The glittering ground seem'd vying with the skies ; Tho' with gay stars its fairy brilliance glows, The world reflects its beams, its splendour vies. The smooth unrippled ocean seem'd of burnish'd gold, The woods on every leaf a various gem uphold. The virgin moon array'd herself in pride :

Passing midst humble handmaids of her show. She seem'd with stately march slowly to glide, And view propitious all the earth below
The 'guards are sleeping, and the tomb is seal'd.

What is that burst of sound that breaks their dream, Piercing the rocky sides ? "What is reveal'd,

Thus borne upon the light's far-shining gleam ? The God arises, wends his far far stretching flight, And passes up to heaven on clouds of vapour'd light. Smiling, his lips seem blessing the low earth,

His hands outstretch'd, held o'er the hurried field. Seem bidding Mercy waken to new mirth ;

Now she may rise, and man from justice shield
SECTION IV.

a aision of tlje €nt» of JHau's present §)tate.

A BREATH, a desolating breath descends ;

Death rides upon its poM er, and ghastly slays With look of eyeless head ; to earth it sends

The foundling birth, the race of other days. See where liis steed, of red and burning vapours got, Seems the Simoon, slow passing o'er some luckless spot ; When Nature, sweltering in the burning glow.

Calls Zephyrs forth to fan its heated breast, Such comes from mouth of some deceiving foe.

And blasts the fool that gains its own behest
XXXIT.

TtTror, with shrieks, aud fire that gleams on high,

Strikes at the heart, and throws the warrior down. Fear skulking comes, and with its wandering eye

Seeks whom to touch with holt of ice, unshown. Pale Pestilence and Plague, and Slaughter's reddening arm Join in the horrid train, and call on wild Alarm.

She shouts their dreadful names, and speaks their power

To tremhling nations prostrate at their feet ; While they with poisons and with daggers lower,

And glut their lust with all the prey they meet.

Their track is mark'd by livid forms, that lay

Putrid and green upon the unmoved sward ; Wolves hungry come, and, scenting at their prey,

Sickening, turn off, and slum their toil's award. One solitary form rears up its whiten'd crest, And lifts aside the corpses weighing on its breast : They are his sons, his daughters, that would shield

Ilim from the poAver of death. He ghastly gazes With his deep sunken eye upon the field,

Then falls upon the child his weak arm raises
That lovely child, smiling yet seem'd to live ;

It was his daughter's boy, and on her lip AVith smiling lips was feeding, and did give

Mirtli to her heart ; when Slaughter sought to slip Its weapon in their breasts, and came and pierced both; But left within their eye the gleam, as, seeming loth To spoil such beauty, it would leave their joy

Yet decking their young faces brightening glow, And let him lay a smiling round-cheek'd boy

To kill the sire by such heart-breaking show.

XXXTII.

The cheering song of cottagers' loud glee.

As treading o'er the hill's straight path they bound To gather grapes from off the bent down tree.

Wakens no more the mountain's softer sound. No longer now the Zephyrs to the peasant bear The hum of towns and cities breaking the dark air. The hammer and the anvil, and the drone,

Slow, pauseless, of the mill, are silent now. The very sick, have ended e'en their groan ;

No more bv nature's heard a human throe
Impatient man, who with his grating car

And foaming steeds made the great earth to qiialve, Now sleeps ; a long-enduring sleep's embrace

Enfolds him now, and nature rest may take. Alone the avalanches' crash, the torrent's rush Are heard thro' her vast silent reign, all else is hush. Even the beasts, who with their loud long bay

Aifright the peasant in his bed, are still ; Their face upon the earth dismay'd they lay ;

They fear than even man, some greater ill.

The cities then look'd desolate and lono ;

The cottage falls ; the wide long palaced street Was damp, and the rife grass pierced the stone

Untrod, unbroken by the toiling feet. The hustling ships lay rotting on the rocking wave ; Their strong vast hulks were crumbling, tho' tlicstorms they brave. The quays, rear'd by the ever-labouring hand.

Sink when man's spirit lied, as did his form ; These worn by the slow spray's consuming band,

This 'neath the weaker lip of biting worm
Man's race has pass'd some ages from the earth,

No signs of his long reign are seen below, But the few whitening bones, that mark the birth Of some lost form, that pass'd on time's lost flow. The world seem'd not to grieve ; for e'en its widow'd vest Was gay, and bright in show the colours that it drest. Upon famed Rome's smooth hills and grassy dells,

London's long plain and Paris' basin'd vale, The wolf snatch'd the meek lamb ; its hunger fell Now caught no shepherd's threat upon the gale.

When, suddenly, on the four points appear

Four angels ; their blue vests, floating afar, Shame e'en the sky once proud its hue to wear, Holding the winds, they rest upon some star. Their anxious eyes are fixt, and seem to wait command ; 'Tis given : their voice is borne upon the wind's wift band, "Arise ! arise, ye favour'd sons of God !

And leave the scorching caves of burning pain. Arise, and tread once more where once ye trod, Aijd seek the seats of lasting bliss to gain
No more your brothers, now, shall tempt your will ;

But all, at once, confined in mortal spoil, You are now call'd your destiny to fill,

And gain your former seats by welUborne toil. To us 'tis given, to show the mercies of our Lord, And now, uncheckt by foes, to you our help aiford. Then rise, tho' buried in the moaning deep ;

Then rise, tho' sepulchred beneath the mass Of falling mount ! Arise ! and rise to weep

Your crimes, and then to bliss eternal pass."

XLIII.

What is that rustling sound, that wakes the ear,

As if a greater vegetation crept Thro' the mass'd earth, and eager sought to chear

Itself with light and into breathing leapt ? See ! the earth, raised, brings forth, and human forms arise, More numerous than all you wonders of the skies. See ! where yon crowd, following yon dread burst

Of fire and smoke, breaking the solid rock. Hasten, as if they fled some foe accurst.

And thought its speed would at their hastening mock
VVhilc these, rising, as if from tranquil beds,

Look round, serene, wakening from soundest sleep, Not e'en disturb'd by dreams, they raise their heads

And smile upon the rest they found so deep. They recognise the sun ; and if a fear is known. They dread that this is life, which thus again is shown. Each trembling form, that comes from the deep caves

Where punishment awaits the guilty soul. Runs to the mountain's brow, and suppliant craves

Its mercied fall to hide their sins so foul.

Some to the ocean sands rush in great haste :

But there they meet with crowds shaking the drops From their thin bodies ; and the shore is paced

By thousands, whom not e'en the ocean stops. But where the bones beneath the waves' light foam did bleach, The forms as from a winding-sheet stepp'd on the beach. With the blue waves, their blood is mingled now".

In vain, the coral depths give forth their dead. O'er their white bones no more the waves may flow.

For e'en the power of death for ever 's fled.
The leaves of life, fall'n from the human tree,

(As autumn leaves are raised from the low ground, And again sudden on the wind seem free

With life to move upon the air around,) Now rose at once, and their spread dust was animate. One breath of will, from Him who rules their several state. Raised them, altho' the trees' autumnal spoil

Numbers not croAvds like theirs, when the north wind With its cold nipping breath and quick-sped toil

Strips ofiFthe whole, and leaves no speck behind.

XLVII.

When all were risen, the God reveal'd again Shone out on man, not in that lowly vest. Which, suffering, bore the punishment and pain Due unto us, but in his splendour drest. To paint the ministering crowds, the thousand bending knees, The brow, the look sublime, the fair regalities. Of this last act, 'tis passing my weak tongue.

The power and courts of kings in words may glow More beautiful ; but who has ever sung x

In fitting words such scenes, such heavenly show 
I cannot speak them. All that I can tell

Is, that I seem'd to feel, with millions there, As if the sight of such a smile could, well,

Win even worse than man from evil's lair. Still e'en th' alarm of those, who dreaded lest the whole Of their past torments visit once again their soul, Cause those, who knew the bliss of the grave's rest,

Look back upon its bed without a sigh ; For such the love that enter'd to the breast,

That all again would to their penance fly.

XLIX.

Jehovah from the sight of man withdrew,

And they were left upon the joyful earth. But not their life like ours ; they evil knew,

But 'twas a dream of wrong before this birth. Conscious of virtue, now that they had sinn'd was known By all, and all in penance hoped their grief be shown. There were no rich, no poor, no suffering rank ;

But all bound in one link one father own'd. And him alone, whom they for mercies thank.

And whom they know on mercy's seat's enthroned
Puttlno- their thoughts, their woixls, beneath controul,

They, guided by their guardian angel's rule, Soon gain command o'er their rebellious soul,

And now no more prove folly's laught at tool. Long was their trial, long : but they for strength'ning pray'd. To Power itself, and Power their soul in strength array'd. They chear'd each other ; and the mother's care

Was not to feed her child, but to direct Its steps in virtue's tracks, with it to share

The penance, and each weakness to correct.

This trial pass'd, and God open'd the gate

Of starry heaven, and he wing'd the feet Of all below ; for all had fiU'd their fate.

And once again the brother angels meet. These first, lockt in their brothers' arms, their time's employ And cares, so long bestow'd in vain, recount in joy. The others then in humble words confess

Their human wrongs, and all at last rejoice. And turn to their great Sire in thankfulness.

Who answers thus in mildly sounding voice :
LII.

'' My children, you on earth have even known

The love, that fathers to their offspring bear : Their love is but a type of that I 've shown To those, who have for ages been my care. But justice yet ordains that I above should show Reward to those who proved, in trial, virtue's glow. To these I give the power of sharing all

The bliss they gain, with those who fail'd on earth j Or, if they will deny this kinder call, Of leaving those within their later birth






