



THE DIARY

1816. April z\.— I left London at 10 in the morn
ing, with Lord Byron, Scrope Davies, Esq., and

J. Hobhouse, Esq.



The view from Shooter's Hill was extensive and

beautiful, being on a much larger scale than the view

from Stirling.



The plain, enamelled with various colours accord-

ing to the different growth of the corn, spread far

before our sight, was divided irregularly by the river.

The Thames next, with its majestic waves, flowed in

the plain below, bearing numerous fleets upon its

flood. Its banks in many parts were beautiful. The
chalky banks were alternated with the swelling hills,

rising from the waves, of the pleasing green-brown,

the effect of the first dawn of spring on the vegetable

creation.

At Canterbury we saw the Cathedral. I know not

how it was, whether my mind had been prepared by
the previous sight of glorious nature to receive

pleasing impressions, but the spot where the high

altar and Thomas a Becket's tomb stood seemed to

me one of the most beautiful effects that I had ever

seen arising from Saxo-Gothic architecture; for,

though it had not all the airiness and awe-inspiring

height that I had seen in other cathedrals, 'yet its



DOVER 27

simple beauty pleased me more than anything I had
yet seen.

Remounting, we soon arrived at Dover, where we
slept, when the packet-boat captain had sufficiently

disturbed us.

April 25.—This day was spent at Dover The
greater part was occupied in procuring what had
been neglected in London, and in seeing the carriage

well packed up. After dinner, however, we went in

search of Churchill's tomb, raised, we had learned, to

his memory by his friend Wilkes. Arrived at the

house of the sexton, he led us to a ruined church,

passing through which we came into a churchyard,

where children, heedless and unconscious of what

they trampled on, sportively ran amid the raised turf

graves. He pointed out to us a tombstone, un-

distinguished from those of the tradesmen near him,

having merely, like them, a square tablet stuck into

the ground, whereon was written, " Here lie the

remains of the celebrated Churchill.

" Life to the last enjoyed, here Churchill lies.

Candidate.^'

 The green turf was beginning already

to decay upon his tomb, which when the sexton heard

us lamenting he assured us that his grave, as well as

the rest, would be newly decked as soon as Nature



—
28 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

had vested its fullest green—for that was an old custom.

Churchill owed, then, only to a common hand what
the pride of a friend refused—the safety of his burial-

place. Wilkes only sought the gratification of his

vanity. While he consigned his friend's last relics to

the keeping of a tablet, he consigned his own pride in

such a friend to the keeping of a column in his own
grounds. Yet I do not know whether the scene was
not more moving, though no vainly pompous inscrip-

tion pointed out the spot where this poet was buried.

There were two authors ; one, the most distin-

guished of his age ; another, whose name is rising

rapidly (and a third, ambitious for literary
; dis-

tinction). What a lesson it was for them when,

having asked the sexton if he knew why so many
came to see this tomb, he said "

: I cannot tell ; I had
not the burying of him."



We then returned home, where, having delivered

my play into their hands, I had to hear it laughed at

—(an author has always a salvo) partly, I think,

from the way in which it was read. One of the party,

however—to smoothe, I suppose, my ruffled spirits

took up my play, and apparently read part with

g^reat attention, drawing applause from those who
before had laughed. He read on with so much
attention that the others declared he had never been

so attentive before.



I afterwards went out, and did a very absurd thing,

which I told ; and found I had not only hurt myself



THE CHANNEL 31

but might possibly hurt others for whom I cared

much more.

April 26.—We embarked at 9 o'clock, much
hurried, with three servants.



When at a distance, we waved our hands and hats,

bidding adieu. The wind was completely in our

teeth, but we made the passage in sixteen hours.

The coast of Dover is very striking, though miserably

barren-looking. The clifif is steep, though not such

as Shakespear paints. The castle—at a distance,

which is the only way I viewed it— is miserable.

Sailing from England, I for a long time kept my eye

upon its stern white cliffs, thinking on her who bade

me join her remembrance with the last sight of my
native soil.



They at last faded from my sight, and all on board

looked dreary ; the sea dashed over us, and all wore



32 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

an aspect of grief. Towards night a most beautiful

spectacle was seen by myself, who alone remained on

deck. The stars shedding merely a twilight enabled

me to see the phosphoric light of the broken foam in

all its splendour. But the most beautiful moment was

that of its first appearance : no sound around save the

sullen rushing of the vessel, and the hoarse cries of

the heaving sailor ; no light save a melancholy

twilight, which soothed the mind into forgetfulness of

its grief for a while—a beautiful streak following the

lead through the waves. We arrived at Ostend at

2 o'clock in the morning.



Arising in the morning, I went upon a stroll round

the town. Saw little girls of all ages with head-

dresses ; books in every bookseller's window of the

most obscene nature ; women with wooden shoes
;

men of low rank basking in the sun as if that would

evaporate their idleness. The houses generally good

old style, very like a Scotch town, only not quite so

filthy. Very polite custom-house officers, and very

civil waiters. Fine room painted as a panorama, all

French-attitudinized. Went into a shop where no one

spoke French. Tried German ; half-a-dozen women
burst out laughing at me. Luckily for myself, in a

good humour ; laughed with them. Obliged to buy

two books I did not want, because I let a quarto fall

upon a fine girl's head while looking at her eyes.

Coaches of the most horrid construction ; apparently

some fine horses, others small. Fortifications look

3



34 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

miserable. Once stood a fine siege, when 40,000 on one

side and 80 on the other fed fowls and manured the

fields. What for? For religion? No—for money.

There was the spring of all. As long as only religion

and rights were affected, bigoted religionists and wild

republicans were alone concerned ; but a step too far,

and all was ruined.



There is one standing by it, of Vandyck, which has

some sublimity in it, perhaps arising from indistinct-

ness. It represents the effect of Christ's last sigh. By

this altar stood twelve small pictures, hung out at this

time for people to tread the " way of Calvary," repre-



42 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

senting the different stages of our Saviour's sufferings.

There were many more pictures, but I cannot re-

member ; seeing so many crowded in the Gallery put

others out of my head. But there were painted in the

Cathedral of St. Bavon, on the marble in the style

of reliefs, different subjects of Scripture in a most

masterly style ; and so well were the shades managed

that we could hardly believe the cicerone when he

assured us they were paintings.

In the Gallery of Casts there were the statues of

two English ladies of London by an artist who resided

thirty years there, and upon his return bestowed these

as his finest works. The faces, though not perfect or

Grecian, I must say for my countrywomen, pleased

me almost as much as any Venus de' Medici.

I have found the people polite, so far as showing

the way and then not waiting for a reward—taking

off their hats as ifj/ou had done them the favour.

April 28.—We set off at 8 this morning to go to

Anvers ; but, after having proceeded some way, one

of the wheels refused to turn, and, after at the next

village hammering a long while, I rode off in a passing

caleche to Ghent, where I put a mardchal with his

assistant into a voiture, and, mounting myself on
horseback, returned to the coach. My horse was par-

ticularly fond of the shade ; and, a house being near

one of the barriers, he kindly stopped there to cool



—
GHENT 43

me. I, after waiting some time, began to press him

to go forward, when he kicked etc. We went, while

the carriage was being repaired, into a cottage, where

all was extremely neat, and we saw two pictures in

it that certainly would not shame the collection of

many of our soi-disant cognoscenti. The old man
was sick of a fever ; and, upon giving him medicine,

his kind half sympathetically fell ill of a toothache.

Never did I see such chips of the old block as his two

daughters. They were very kind. It being Sunday,

we saw all the women of the village—all ugly : indeed,

I have not seen a pretty woman since I left Ostend.



On proceeding on our journey, we were stopped for

our passports, and the fellow began bullying us, think-

ing we were French ; but, when he heard we were

English, he became cap in hand, and let us go : in-

deed, we have not yet shown our passports.

Having eaten, I issued forth in search of the Pro-

menade, and found the canal with walks called La
Copeure. Many ladies, all ugly without exception

the only pretty woman being fat and sixty. It very

much resembled the Green Basin, where our West-end

cits trot on one another's heels with all possible care :

not quite so crowded. Coming back, I tourized to the



44 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

Roi d'Espagne, where, as in a coffee-house, I found

a room full of disreputable women and card-tables.

This, instead of the streets, is the lounge for such

women. I went to the Caf6 Grand, where by means

of mirrors some excellent effects are produced.

There also were billiards, cards, dice, etc. A cup of

coffee, some centimes ; a glass of lemonade, two sous :

a woman presides at the end of the room.

" Lord Byron " was in the Ghent Gazette. Lord

Byron encouraged me to write Cajetan, and to con-

tinue being a tragedian. Murray offered :^iSO for

two plays, and ;^Soo for my tour.

April 29.—Looking from my window, I saw a

native dashing about in a barouche and four. There

is in the town a society of nobles, and another of

literati. Mr. Scamp has a fine collection of pictures,

which I did not see. In Ghent, as well as in all other

places where I have been, the barber's sign is Mam-
brino's helm. On the Sunday mornings there is a

market for flowers in pot in the Place des Armes.

We set off at 11 in the morning, and passed

through some fine villages : one of which, St.

Nicholas, the mistress of the inn told me Buonaparte

made into a town—"mais il n'y a pas des postes."

The country is tiresomely beautiful. Fine avenues,

which make us yawn with admiration ; not a single

variation; no rising ground—yes, one spot raised



BELGIUM 45

for a windmill. The landscape is as unchangeable
as the Flemish face. The houses white-washed,

with a row of trees before them ; the roofs tiled, and
the windows large. Indeed, the appearance of com-
fort in the places we have passed through is much
greater than any I have seen in England. We
have only seen one country-villa, and that very Eng-
lish : its pasture had the only firs we have yet seen.

The avenues are sometimes terminated by a church

or a house—the church very ugly; and both very

tiresome, as they always prove much farther off than

is at first expected. The ground cultivated, and with-

out a weed—no waste ground. The plough moves as

if cutting water, the soil is so light a sand. Women
work in the fields as well as men. No more difference

is found in the face of the inhabitants than in the face

of the country. Nothing striking, all evenness, no

genius, much stupidity^ They seemed to spend all

their fund of cleanliness upon their fields and houses,

for they carry none about them.

An oldish man wears a three-cornered cocked hat,

capacious breeches, black or blue stockings, buckles,

and a great-coat young, fancy travelling-caps. The
;

women wear enormous gold ear-rings, large wooden

shoes. Their dress is a kind of bed-gown, like the

Scotch. Young girls of eight in town have their hair

dressed with a net or cap. In towns and villages



—

46 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

the better peasant-women wear a black silk mantle

with a hood, that looks well. Multitudes of children

everywhere, who tumble and run by the side of the

carriage to gain a few centimes. In the larger villages

the market-places are splendidly large, with a little

square place in the middle, with pollards and a statue.

The houses seem comfortable everywhere. Going

into the house of a postmaster, we saw some English

prints. At another, our servants having got down
and comfortably seated themselves to a bottle of

wine etc., the postmistress, on our getting out, took

us for the servants, and told us " the messieurs Anglais

were in yon room "—and then made us a thousand

apologies. At every posthorse place there is kept

a book of the posts : many barriers—every i| mile.

At Gand they had told us we could not reach

Anvers without passing the Scheldt at 2 o'clock

we passed it at 6^.

The town of Antwerp makes a good figure at a

distance, chiefly on account of its Cathedral, which

has a very airy appearance, the steeple showing the

sky between its meeting arches. About five steeples.

The fortifications, which enabled Carnot to make such

a defence, produce no great effect on the sight.



The Scheldt is a fine river, not so large as our



ANTWERP 47

Thames, and covered with ugly Dutch vessels. We
passed our coach in a boat.



On landing, twenty porters ran off with our things

to a cart. As they were passing, one in all the pomp
of office stopped us, and asked for our passports, which

(on handing to him) he detained, giving his directions

to the police.

The older parts of Antwerp have a novel and

strange effect by the gable-ends being all to the

street, ornamented—very acute angles. The Place de

Meer is fine. The old street, the finest I ever saw,

has some fine houses. Many of the houses have

English labels on them. In our sitting-room are two

beds. Indeed, the towns are beautiful : their long

streets, their houses all clean-stuccoed or white-

washed, with strange old-fashioned fronts, the frequent

canals, the large places and venerable cathedrals.

Their places are much finer than our squares, for they

contain trees, and are open without railing.

Went to the caii, and saw all playing at dominoes.

Read The Times till the 23rd. Fine furniture, every-

where of cherry-tree.



48 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

At Gand in the Cathedral the cicerone laid great

stress on the choir-seats being all made of solid acajou.

The master of the inn at Ghent assures me the

carriage of Buonaparte was made in Paris—the body-

carriage at Brussels : no English work. Plenty of

Americans in the town.

April 30.—Got up late, and went to look at the

carriage, and found that the back had been not of the

best-made. Called a mar6chal, who assured me it

could not be better. Breakfasted. Then looked at

an old caleche, for which asked 60 naps. Refused it.

Got, with a guide, a caleche to see the lions. The
town is large : apparently, not a proportionable

quantity of misery. Women better-looking. At all

the fountains. Madonnas—and upon all the corners

of the streets, with lamps before them. Lamps with

reverberators strung on ropes into the middle of the

streets. Went to the Cathedral. Everywhere we
have been, dreadful complaints of French vandalism.

In this chapel it has been shameless : once crowded
with altars of marble, now there are about five—only

two marble, the others painted in imitation. Pictures

were stolen—altars sold by auction—only one saved,

bought by a barber for a louis. The others, with all

the tombs, monuments, everything, broken by these

encouragers of the fine arts. So great was the ruin

that there were five feet of fragments over the church



:

ANTWERP 49

—even the columns that support the roof were so

much defaced that they were obliged, in restoring it,

to pare them all much thinner. Some pictures were

carried to Paris, of which some are now about to be

replaced. It was the feast of St. Anthony, and many
candles were burning about, and some relics were

fixed above the doors. In many parts of the chapel

were frames containing silver representations, very

small, of bad limbs etc., offered by the devout. Many
images over altars, dressed out in silk and taffeta

most common one, the Virgin Mary. Though the

French acted with all the spirit of Vandals and true

Gauls, yet to their very mischief is owing the greatest

beauty of the Cathedral, the choir not being divided

from the church, so that from one end to the other

there is a complete perspective and one of the finest

effects I have seen, the airiness and length being now
proportionate. There is one great defect in the internal

decorations—that they are Greek. What bad taste

it is to ornament Gothic with Corinthian columns

must be evident : to make it also more glaring, the

marble is all coloured. There is here a fine marble

altar-railing. Indeed, in all the churches we have

here seen they are beautiful—especially where boys,

called in Italian "puttini," are sculptured. The con-

fessionals are of wood, with evangelical figures, nearly

as large as life, between each box—not badly carved.

4



:

so THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

We went to see another church, wherein is the

tomb of Rubens.



It is in a chapel by itself, where annually a mass

is said for his soul. It is worthy of him : ornamented

by a painting, by himself, of St. George, and a statue

he brought with him from Rome of the Holy Virgin.

The church in which he is buried was saved from

pillage by the priests belonging to it revolutionizing.

It is crowded with altars and pictures—some Rubens,

some Polenck, and others. There is a painting by

Metsys, who originally was a mar^chal, and who with

his mere hammer formed the decorations to a pump,

which are not bad. The Latin inscription on his

monumental stone refers to a story related of him

that, upon courting the daughter of Francis Floris,

the artist with indignation talked about the dirty

rascal's impudence, he being merely a blacksmith
;

on which Metsys set off for Rome, and upon his

return asked the daughter to introduce him to her

father's room of painting : where, finding a picture

not finished, he painted a bee—that excited the in-

dignation of Floris's pocket-handkerchief, and gained

him his daughter. I have seen the picture, and it

might be true. The pump is not bad, being merely

beaten into shape. On the top is a giant who used

to cut off merchants' gains by means of tolls, and



ANTWERP SI

their hands by means of axes. He used to throw an

iron band into the scales of his tradesmen ; and froni

thence, 'tis said, Antwerp got its name.



The sides of this church all along are lined with

confessionals.

In the Church des Augustins we saw Rubens's

Assembly of the Saints, from Paris ; where he has

shown how weak he could be in composition, and in

vanity—for it is the third picture in which he has

put himself in St. George's armour. The composition

is confused, without an object to fix the attention.

A Vandyck near him is much superior.



Here is also the famous picture of Jordaens, of The

Martyrdom of St. Apollonia. Colouring approaches

Rubens ; but abominable composition—crowded, large,

numerous figures in a small space. There were some
modern paintings of existing artists—meagre statue-

compositions.

In the Mus^e we saw many Rubenses. The famous

Descent from the Cross : the effect of the white sheet

is wonderfully beautiful. Picture's drawing I do not

like. The Christ seems not dead, as there is certainly

action ; but the colouring is splendidly rich. The
Crucifixion near it, inferior in all. In a sketch near

it he has not succeeded so well in the white sheet, it

being not so splendidly white. We could only see

the side-pieces of the great Crucifixion, as the large

piece was being framed. In these there is much
caricature drawing : a woman rising from the dead
surely a woman large as Guy Warwick giant's wife,

if ever he had one : caricature physiognomies, and
most hellish egregious breasts, which a child refuses,

with horror in its face. His horses have much spirit



ANTWERP 53

true Flemish size. Indeed, divest Rubens of his rich

apparel, and he is a mere dauber in design. There

is a Mary going to Elizabeth, looking more like a

cardinal : indeed, my companion. Lord Byron, took

her for one of the red-vested nobles. No divinity

about his Christs putrefaction upon his
; Gods ; ex-

aggerated passion about his men and women, painted

not all-concealing. In his picture of The Adoration

of the Magi, query did he not intend to play upon
the people by passing off a caricature for a religious

painting? The royal personage in green seems as if

his eyes had grown big after dinner. He has no

costume properly applied : the Virgin in the manger

is dressed meretriciously in silks and lace. Then

look at our blessed Saviour showing His wounds.

His finest painting is his Crucifixion in which is the

white sheet : but there are defects. What then must

be the power of colouring which causes you to view

his paintings with pleasure ! It is like melodious

music which makes you forget the absurd words of

an old English song.

Vandyck, in my opinion, was much superior to

Rubens. His colouring, near his, is sombre; but

then his design is more perfect, his impressions

remain longer in the mind distinct, and do not fade

away into ideas of red and blue round white. A
little Crucifix of his is worth his rival's largest



54 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

paintings. His Christ Dead is beautiful, wherein are

contained the Blessed Virgin, St. Mary Magdalene,

and St. John weeping: the different expressions of

grief, the unison of colouring with the subject, the

composition, all excellent.

From the Cathedral we went to see the works

of Napoleon. We first saw the Basins. They are

not so large as our West India Docks—square—but

are capable of holding ships of the line; there are

two. Between them is what was formerly the

Hanseatic Hall, now magazines. When the English

were last here they threw bombs, but this was of no
avail ; dung was put upon the ships, and men were

at hand in case of fire. From the Basins we went

along the quays—very long, along the labouring

Scheldt ; then into the places for marine arsenals,

where the vessels were on the stocks—the finest works
I ever saw, now useless through our jealousy. The
rope-house, quite finished, is enormously long, and is

to be pulled down. The timbers for the ship were
numbered, and carried to Amsterdam. The citadel

was mean-looking, though so strong. The chief

batteries are as old as Alva's time—there was one
pointed out as erected by Colonel Crawford. Before

Napoleon's time there was little done towards the

formation of these basins and others
; but, said our

guide, "he decreed they should be made, and they



—:

ANTWERP 55

appeared." They are all surrounded with high walls

to hinder the escape of the employed. Carnot has

commanded here twice. He was rather disliked, yet

they had rather have him than any other. They all

agree in his genius. In the time of the Walcheren

business the English were expected with open arms

only three hundred soldiers—Bernadotte was general.

The siege was not very strict on the last occasion,

and no mischief was done on either side. In the

Basins there have been twenty-six line. In the dread

of a siege all the suburbs were destroyed and all the

trees around. The suburbs rose immediately, the

trees in years. In the citadel there are 1 500 for9ats.

Sometimes the number exceeds 2000.

Having seen thus much, we returned, lunched, and

rode off. Hardly gone a little way when our carriage

broke down. The trees are more various—vegetation

more advanced—more inequality of ground—more

pollards—more apparent misery—more villas, some

pretty—more clipped hedges—more like England

fine, large, town-like villages. Carriage broke again

walked to Malines—arrived there at ten. Women
improve.

At Antwerp, in one church on the outside, saw a

supposed exact imitation of the Sepulchre, though I

do not know how it came seated " in purgatory " ; as

there certainly is a place so called round it, full of



56 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

the damned and flames. The place is grotto-work.

Within there is a representation of our Lord swathed

in linen. All over there are statues, so so. David is

at a respectable distance from purgatory : this makes

it the more remarkable that the Sepulchre is seated

in purgatory. Indeed, indeed, there is much absurdity.

There is an academy for drawing and painting,

with a museum. The Place is in a garden.

On arriving at Malines we found Mr. Pradt gone

from his bishopric amongst his brethren ; and we are

assured he was a " vraiment frangais," and that he

was not a " Catholique," and that this town wanted a
" vraiment Catholique."

 a painting

by Floris—the one on which is the bee—where he has



BRUSSELS 57

shown great imagination and fire in the devils. It is

the victory of the angels when fighting against the

devils.

May I.—As soon as up, I went to the Cathedral,

which has a fine tower. On entering I saw many
pictures. None that I saw seemed particularly good.

The church was pretty full of people, who really

seemed devout. They were not the old and weak,

but there was of every age. The young maiden was

seen by the side of decrepit age, beauty by deformity,

childhood by manhood. The effect on the mind is

contagious. Many masses were going on at the

same time. A woman went round for money for the

chairs. Here I saw the first Christian caryatides.

We soon set off for Brussels. Between V. and

that town the road is beautiful ; a canal on one side,

fine trees forming a long avenue diversified with

glimpses of a rich country. We passed the Castle of

Lac, the former residence of Buonaparte. It has a

fine front upon an eminence, but the dome stands

forth in glaring ugliness. We entered Brussels by

the All^e Verte, a fine promenade.

Brussels, the old town, is not so fine as Antwerp,

Ghent, or Bruges. The Grand March6 is very beauti-

ful, only the buildings seem to be neglected. Fine

public offices, with a tall spire, on one side—the Mairie

opposite. The Place Royale is very fine ; the fronts



58 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

of the houses and hotels around seeming together

to form parts of one great palace ; and the church on

one side, with the housy wings, has a fine effect in

spite of the ugly tower at the top. The gardens are

beautiful with green, and well laid out in walks,

with groups and termites—the Palace opposite. The
entrance from the Place Royale presents a fine front,

and the suburbs round it are also good. We are at

the Hotel d'Angleterre. Saw Morning Chronicles,

which are again dutysied.

Brussels was not at all fortified in the Waterloo

time. The Germans at one time had retreated as far

as the gates, which were obliged to be shut against

them. In case of a retreat there would have been a

pleasant rush, almost as great as at a fashionable

rout, as they must all have passed through Brussels.

The carriage was put under hand. Crowds of

English.

May 2.—We have seen many, many soldiers. No
wonder they were light of foot when not more heavy
of age, for none have beards yet except some few
cavalry.

The English women are the only good-looking

women in Brussels ; though, with true English
Bullism, they vest here a complete Anglomanian
costume, preserving their French fashions for the

English winds to waft. The women of Brabant and



—

BRUSSELS 59

the Netherlands are all ugly to the eye after the

piquant begins to pall, for there are no regular

beauties or beauty of expression, except that levity

which tells of lightness of cares and youth.

It is not for a foreigner to call a thing absurd

because it does not tally with his ideas, or the

ladies' costume, except the black mantle, should be

put down as such by me. The men also are short

and bad-looking, either consummate impudence

or complete insignificance—no individuality. The
indelicacy of these Belgians is gross ; all kinds of

disgusting books publicly sold, and exposed to the

eyes of all young damsels—beastliness publicly

exhibited on the public monuments—fountains with

men vomiting with effort a stream of water—and

still worse. The town (Brussels) is situated on an

eminence, and is really poor in comparison of the

other Belgic towns by us seen.

After dinner, having dressed, I went, having written

two letters, to the theatre. Mounting a voiture, I was

soon there. Ascending some stairs, I came to a door

where, after some knocking, a man took my money,

and gave me tickets, which, changed twice, brought

me to the first row of boxes. The first look at the

lobbies was sufficient to give me an idea of all the

rest—misery, misery, misery, wherever one turned

to the floor, to the ceiling, to the wall, to the box-



6o THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

wall, all garret of the St. Giles style. Most of the

doors had Abonnement written on them. I got into

one, and what a sight ! boxes dirty with filth. One
chandelier was sufficient for the pockets of a Brussels

manager, hung from the middle. Pit divided into

two parts of different prices, boxes into three,

and a gallery. Chairs, not benches, in the boxes.

Ladies came and sat and talked, and talked and sat

and stood, and went away. Many English ladies.

Orchestra began—all violins, seven in all. Curtain

up—a farce : no—it did not make me laugh. How
call that a theatrical amusement which only seems
fitted to excite the pleasurable sensation of yawn-
ing ? It was French. An actress, the best amongst
them, spoke French like a base pig; another con-

torted the fine lady into one with a paralytic stroke

after sitting up at cards ; the gentlemen like purlieu-

bullies; and high life was copied from the waiting-

maids of butchers' ladies. I was a little surprised at

the applause that a lady actress gained. It moved
me astonishingly : not her acting, but the lookers-on

acting pleasure. At last came the wind whistling

through the reeds, the thunder-hurling cheeks, and lash-

ing hands, to my great admiration. It moved phlegm.
One who was to act Blondel was vomiting at

home. I went behind the scenes, and saw dismay in

every face, and terror in every limb. The curtain

drew up, and the play began. Hisses hisses, hisses.



!

BRUSSELS 6i

It fell, and fear increased. Some time was spent

in cogitation. The venturous gold-decked hero

advanced, retired, was rebuked by the police and
forced to advance. Hisses. He said to the audience

he was forced to advance. They listened, and qui-

proquos commenced between the players and the

audience, with the sonorous hiss of anger. The police

saw all was in vain, and ordered the actors off the

boards. I in the meantime was chatting with two
apparent goddesses, who very concisely explained the

trembling of the actors, etc., by telling me of real

showers of eggs, etc. As I left the house I heard

groans and hollow sounds, and cries of "Give me back

my money : I am an abonne, and have seen nothing."

I ran— I and the police pushing on, the mob pushing

us back, etc. Going along the lobbies, what was my
wonder to stumble on a bookseller's shop, where was

an assemblage of delicacies fit for the modest, and

wondrous delicate

May 3.—I saw in the street three dogs, of the bull-

dog race, dragging up a hill at a good pace what I

am sure two men would not have strength to drag.

I saw also a goat fastened to a child's car. I went

all over the town for a caliche—bought one for

75 louis. In the evening, having procured redingotes

(which I did not use), we mounted a coach and drove

to . Returned home, ate, and slept.

May 4.—Having risen, foolishly paid 40 naps, to



62 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

the coachmaker. My Lord and servant stepped into

the caliche. I and a servant got on horseback, and

went to Waterloo. We soon entered Soignies, which

on both sides formed a beautiful wood (not forest, for

it was not wild on either side) for several miles. The
avenue it formed varied in length : sometimes the end

was formed by a turn of the road, sometimes by the

mere perspective effect of narrowing. The trees are

all young—none of above thirty years' growth. We
then reached Waterloo, where were the head-quarters

of Napoleon. An officious host pressed us to order

dinner. We ran from his pressing, and advancing

came to St. Jean, where the boys continued the offer-

ings we first had at Waterloo of buttons, books, etc.

This was the village which gave the French name to

the battle, I believe, as it was the spot which Napo-
leon tried to gain. The view of the plain, as we
advanced to the right, struck us as fields formed

almost with the hopes that spirit and war would make
their havoc here. Gentle risings, sufficient to give

advantage to the attacked—few hedges—few trees.

There was no sign of desolation to attract the passer-

by ; if it were not for the importunity of boys, and
the glitter of buttons in their hands, there would be
no sign of war. The peasant whistled as blithely,

the green of Nature was as deep, and the trees waved
their branches as softly, as before the battle. The



WATERLOO 63

houses were repaired. Only a few spots with white

plaster between the bricks pointed out the cannon's

ruin ; and in ruins there was only Hougoumont, which
was attacked so bravely and defended so easily—at

least so I should imagine from the few killed in the

garden and the appearance of the whole, while so

many French lay dead in the field. In the garden

were only 25 English killed, while in the field 1500;

and on the other side 600 French, not counting the

wounded, were slain. Indeed, the gallantry, the

resolution and courage, which the French displayed

in attacking this place, guarded from the heights by
our cannon, and by our soldiers through the loop-

holes, would alone ennoble the cause in which they

fought. Before arriving at Hougoumont, the spots

where Hill, Picton, and the Scotch Greys did their

several deeds, were pointed out to us. The spot

which bore the dreadful charge of cavalry is only

marked by a hedge. The cuirassiers advancing, the

Scots divided—showed a masked battery, which fired

grape into the adverse party's ranks—then it was the

Scots attacked. I do not now so much wonder at

their victory. The cuirasses which we saw were almost

all marked with bullets, lance- and sabre-cuts. Buona-

parte and the French, our guide said, much admired

the good discipline and undaunted courage of the

short-kilted Scot. Going forward, the spot at which



64 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

the Prussians, the lucky gainers of the battle, emerged,

was pointed out to us—and, a little farther on, we

were shown the spot where Colonel Howard, my
friend's cousin, was buried before being carried to

England. Three trees, of which one is cut down,

mark the spot, now ploughed over. At Hougoumont

we saw the untouched chapel where our wounded

lay, and where the fire consumed the toes of a

crucifix. We there inscribed our names amongst

cits and lords. We found here a gardener who
pointed out the garden—the gate where the French

were all burnt—the gap in the hedge where the

French attempted, after the loss of 1500 men, to

storm the place—the field, quarter of an acre, in

which were heaps of Gallic corpses. The gardener

and the dog, which we saw, had been detained at

Hougoumont by General Maitland in case of a

retreat. The peasants declare that from 4 to 5

the affair was very, very doubtful, and that at the last

charge of the Imperial Guards Napoleon was certain

of being in Brussels in quatre heures. Wellington,

after the defeat of the Prussians etc., on the 17th

went to Waterloo, and determined where he would

place each corps. This was a great advantage : but,

in spite of the excellence of his position, he would

certainly have been defeated had it not been for the

fortunate advance of the Prussians. From Hougou-



:

WATERLOO 65

mont we went to the red-tiled house which is the

rebuilding of the house where was Buonaparte's last

station and head-quarters. It was from this spot that

he viewed the arrival of the Prussians, under the idea

of their being the corps of Grouchy. It was here he
felt first the certainty of defeat, just after he had led

the old Imperial Guard, in the certainty of victory, to

his last attack. La Belle Alliance next appeared

along the road, here where Wellington and Blucher

met. The name is derived from a marriage in the

time of peace : it is now applicable to a war-meeting.

Thence we returned to St. Jean, after going again to

Hougoumont. There we were shown cuirasses, helms,

buttons, swords, eagles, and regiment-books. We
bought the helms, cuirasses, swords, etc., of an officer

and soldier of cuirassiers, besides eagles, cockades,

etc. Beggars, the result of English profusion. A
dinner, measured by some hungry John Bull's hungry

stomach. We rode off the field, my companion

singing a Turkish song—myself silent, full gallop

cantering over the field, the finest one imaginable

for a battle. The guide told us that the account

Buonaparte's guide gave of him after the battle was

that he only asked the road to Paris, not saying

anything else.

At Hougoumont various spots were pointed out

amongst the rest the one where Maitland stood

5



—

66 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

watching a telegraph on the neighbouring rise, which

told him what was going on on both sides.

We rode home together through Soignies forest

—black. The twilight made the whole length of the

road more pleasing. On reaching home, we found

the coach was jogged ; so much so that it would not

allow us to put confidence in it, etc. At last we gave

it into Mr. Gordon's hands. My friend has written

twenty-six stanzas Q) to-day—some on Waterloo.



I made up my accounts, and was not a little startled

by a deficit of 10 napoleons, which I at last found

was a mere miscalculation. Rode about thirty miles

in all.

Forgot to say I saw Sir Nath Wraxall at



68 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

Dover, who, having introduced himself to Lord Byron

as a friend defamille, began talking, knocking his feet

in rattattat, still all the while oppressed by feeling

very awkward.



At Brussels, the people were in a great stew, the

night of the battle of Waterloo—their servants and
others waking them every minute to tell them the

French were at the gates. Some Germans went there

with mighty great courage, in flight. Lord W sent to a colonel to enquire whether he was
going to fly from or to the battle, giving him his

choice to act in either way. On hearing this, the said

colonel boldly faced about, and trotted to Brussels

with his troop. A supernumerary aide-de-camp, the

brother of N., with two others, was riding between
the ranks while the French were firing ; when, ours

crying out " They aim at you," all three were struck

in the jaw, much in the same place, dead. After the

battle, a friend asking what was become of N., the



CHATEAU DU LAC 69

Serjeant pointed to his feet, saying " There," which

was fact. Dacosta, the guide, says that Buonaparte

was cool and collected till the Prussians arrived ; that

then he said to Bertrand, " That appears to be the

Prussian eagle " ; and, upon Bertrand's assenting, his

face became momentarily pale. He says that, when
he led up the Imperial Guard, on arriving at the red-

tiled house, he went behind a hillock, so as not to be

seen, and so gave them the slip. Wellington acted

the soldier when he should have acted the general,

and the light-limbed dancer when he should have

been the soldier. I cannot, after viewing the ground,

and bearing in mind the men's superior courage, give

Wellington the palm of generalship that has been

snatched for him by so many of his admirers.

Napoleon only took one glass of wine from the

beginning of the battle to the end of his flight.

May 5.—Got up at ten from fatigue. Whilst at

breakfast, there came a Mr. Pryse Gordon for L

B. I entertained him. He has been to Italy,

and travelled a great deal—a good-natured gentle-

man. Took him to see the carriage : there he intro-

duced me to his son by means of a trumpet. After

his departure we set off for the Chateau du Lac,

where we found the hind front much finer than the

other for want of the startling (?) dome and low

windows. It has all its master-apartments on the



—

70 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

ground-floor: they are extremely well laid out both

with regard to comfort and magnificence—they were

furnished by Nap. We saw the bed where

Josephine, Marie Louise, and the Queen of Holland,

have been treading fast on one another's heels. The

hall for concerts divides the Emperor's from the

Empress' rooms—it has a rich appearance, and is

Corinthian. The flooring of the Emperor's is all

wood of different colours—checked—having to my eye

a more pleasing appearance than the carpeted ones of

the Empress. I sat down on two chairs on which had

sat he who ruled the world at one time. Some of his

eagles were yet remaining on the chairs. The servant

seemed a little astonished at our bowing before them.

We returned, it raining all the while. After dinner

Mr. G came for us to go to coffee. We went,

and were graciously received ; Lord B as him-

self, I as a tassel to the purse of merit. I there saw

a painting of Rembrandt's wife or mother by himself,

which was full of life, and some verses by Walter

Scott written in the hostess' album, where he says

Waterloo will last longer than Cressy and Agincourt

How different ! They only agree in one thing—that

they were both in the cause of inj ustice. The novels of

Cast! were presented to me by Mr. Gordon, which I

was rather surprised at. We came over. Scott writes

in M. G book



—

BRUSSELS 71

" For one brief hour of deathless fame " ,

"Oh Walter Scott, for shame, for shame" .



May 6.—Mr. G and son came while at break-

fast gave us letters, etc. Saw the little child again
; ;

B gave it a doll.



The carrossier came. Set off at two, passing through

a country increasing in inequalities. We arrived first

at Louvain, where we saw the outside of a beautiful

Town-hall, which is one of the prettiest pieces of

external fretwork I have seen. Thence we went to

Tirlemont, where was a Jubilee. Saints and sinners

under the red canopy (the sky dirty Indian-ink one)

were alike in the streets. Every street had stuck in

it, at a few paces from the house-walls, fir-branches

i6 or 17 feet high, distant from one another 5 or 6

feet. Thence to St. Trond, where we ate—and slept,

I suppose. The country is highly cultivated, and

the trees older. The avenues have a more majestic

appearance from the long swells of ground and the

straight roads, but there is more squalid misery than

I have seen anywhere. The houses are many of them
mud, and the only clean part about them is the white-

wash on the external walls. Dunghills before some
must be trodden on before entering the houses. The
towns also fall off greatly in neat and comfortable

looks. The walls round them look ruined and deso-

late, and give a great idea of insecurity. We put the

servants on board-wa^es.



—;

BATTICE 73

May 7.—Set off from St. Trond at 11. The
country is highly cultivated ; continual hill and dale

lower orders miserable in perfection ; houses built of

mud, the upper storeys of which are only built of

beams, the mud having fallen off. Bridges thrown
over the dirt they were too idle to remove. Dung-
hills at their doors, and ditches with black fetid water

before their first step. Liege has a pretty neigh-

bourhood, but the town itself is filthy and disagree-

able. They visited our passports here at three

different places. The hill above the town is enor-

mously steep ; and from some way beyond it has a

beautiful view of Liege with its towers and domes
of the country with its many cots and villas—and of

the Meuse. The road now lies through a scene

where cottages are spread like trees, and hedges

like furrows of corn, the fields are so minutely

divided. A little farther still we had a most splen-

did view through many miles. From a valley we
could see everything clearly, crowded in a blue tint,

and in a river through it we could see the shadows

of the trees. The cottages are improving, and the

roads becoming the worst ever seen paved still, but
;

so horridly hilled and vallied that the rolling of the

carriage is like the rolling of a ship.

We came at last to Battice; but before entering

we passed by a village where beggar little cherubs



:

74 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

came to the carriage-side, and running cried out,

" Donnez-nous quelque chose. Monsieur le chef de

bataillon"; another, "Monsieur le g^ndral." And a

third little urchin, who gesticulated as well as cried,

perceiving the others had exhausted the army, cried,

" Un sou. Messieurs les rois des Hanov6riens !
" We

arrived at Battice, where beggars, beggars. There

we found horses just come in.

After debate (wherein I was for Aix-la-Chapelle,

L B for stopping) we set off; and such

a jolting, rolling, knocking, and half-a-dozen etc., as

our carriage went through, I never saw, which put

L B to accusing me of bad advice ; clear-

ing however as the road mended. The rain fell into

a pond, to be illuminated by sunshine before we
reached Aix-la-Chapelle at half-past twelve.

May 8.—Got up late. Went to see the Cathedral

full of people, lower ranks, hearing mass. Miserable

painting, architecture, etc. Saw also a church wherein

was no particular picture or anything. At Lifege the

revolutionists had destroyed the fine Cathedral.

A German boy who led me about Aix-la-Chapelle,

on my asking him in broken German about the

baths, led me to a very different place. I was
astonished to find myself in certain company. The
baths are hot sulphuretted - hydrogen - impregnated

water. The sulphur-beds are only shown to dukes



—

ST. JULIERS 75

and kings: so a kingdom is good for something,

I saw the baths themselves : like others, not very

clean-looking.

We left Aix-la-Chapelle at twelve, going through

a fine country, with no hedges but fine woods in the

distance. We arrived at St. Juliers, strongly forti-

fied, where they took our names at entering and at

exiting. It is a neat town, and was besieged last

year. We were at the post taken by a man for

Frenchmen, and he told us we had been driven from

Russia by a band of the Emperor. He seemed to

be very fond of them, and gave as a reason that he

had been employed by them for many years. And,
I forgetfully saying, " What ! were they here "

?

"Yes, and farther." I answered, "Jusqu'a Moscou."
" Oui, et presque plus loin." That " presque " means
much. The French were not generally liked, I be-

lieve. The lower orders perhaps liked them, but the

middle, I doubt. But I cannot say ; I may perhaps

be influenced by the opinion of a beautiful face of

this town, who, on my asking her whether the dames

n'aimaient pas beaucoup les Franqais, answered, " Oui,

les dames publiques."

We find it a great inconvenience that the Poste is

a separate concern, and generally pretty distant from

the inn. The women are many of them very beauti-

ful, and many of them, as well as the men, have fine



76 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

dark eyes and hair. The men wear ear-rings, and

curl their hair ; which, if I remember rightly, was the

custom in the time of Tacitus. Many of the women
wear their hair combed quite back, and upon it a

little square piece of linen. The French were par-

ticularly polite during the siege.

We entered the dominions of the King of Prussia

a little beyond Battice. It causes a strange sensation

to an Englishman to pass into one state from another

without crossing any visible line. Indeed, we should

not have perceived that we had, if we had not been

stopped by a Belgian guard who asked us if we had

anything to declare. The difference is, however, very

striking. The men, the women, everything, improve

—except the cottages. The people look cleaner,

though everything else is dirty ; contrary to the

Belgians, they seem to collect their cleanliness upon
themselves, instead of throwing it upon their cots,

tins, trees, and shrubs.

We arrived at Cologne after much bad, sandy,

heavy road, at ii. The pavement begins to be

interrupted after Aix, but ends almost entirely after

St. Juliers. Cologne is upon a flat on the Rhine.

We were groaning at having no sight of far-famed

Cologne, when we came suddenly under its battle-

ments and towers. We passed through its fortifica-

tions without question. After having found the gates



—

COLOGNE 77

shut, and feed the porter, we found inns full, and
at last got into the H6tel de Prague.

May 9.—Got up very bad.^ Sat down to breakfast.

Just done, we heard some singing. Enquiry told us,

buyable. Got them up. A harp played by a dark-

haired German, pretty, and two fiddlers. She played

and sang The Troubadour, which brought back a

chain of Scotch recollections, and a German song;

then a beautiful march, in which the music died away
and then suddenly revived. After a waltz we dis-

missed them. We both mounted a voiture, and drove

through the town to the Cathedral. Great part

pulled down by the revolutionists, and the roof of

the nave obliged to be restored with plain board

a staring monument over Gallic ruin. There is fine

stained glass, and the effect of its being very high

and variegated in the choir is beautiful. We saw

a fine painting here by Kalf : vide Taschbuch. The

tomb of the three kings said to be worth three

millions of francs, and an immensely rich treasury

wherein was a sacrament worth one million of francs.

In falling down a step I broke a glass, for which they

at first would not take anything—which at last cost

me three francs. Kept countenance amazingly well.

Went to see St. Ursula's Church, where we were

' Such is the word written by Charlotte Polidori. I fancy it

ought to be "late."



78 THE DIARY OF POLIDORl

shown virgins' skulls of ninety years old, male and

female, all jumbled into a mass of 11,000 virgins'

bones arranged all in order—some gilt, etc. A whole

room bedecked with them. All round, indeed, what-

ever we saw were relics, skulls ; some in the heads of

silver-faced busts, some arranged in little cells with

velvet cases, wherein was worked the name of each.

Paintings of St. Ursula, etc. Asked for a piece out

of the masses : only got a smile, and a point of a

finger to an interdiction in Latin, which I did not

read.

We went to see a picture of Rubens, The Nailing

of St. Peter to a Cross ; the best design, though not

very good, I yet have seen of his. A German artist

copying it spoke English to us.

Returned home. Sent my name to Professor Wall-

raf : got admission. Found a venerable old man who
has spent his life in making a collection of paintings

and other objects of vertti belonging to his country,

Cologne, which he intends leaving to his native

town.



The innkeeper makes you put your name—whence

—whither—profession and age—every night. Rogues
all of them, charging much.

May II.—We saw the first vines a little before

entering Cologne some days ago. We left Bonn at

eleven, the town having nothing in particular. The
Seven Hills were the first that struck our sight on

one of the highest pinnacles in Drachenfels, now a

mere ruin, formerly a castle of which many a tale is

told. There was by the roadside a monument raised

upon the spot where one noble brother killed another.

Crucifixes all the way. We had the river on one

side, whence rose hills (not mountains) cultivated

halfway for vines—and the rest, nuts, shrubs, oak, etc.

Towers on pinnacles, in ruin ; villages (with each its

spire) built of mud.

Cultivation in a high degree ; no hedges, ground

minutely divided into beds rather than fields ; women
working in the fields ; ox and horse ploughing ; oxen

draw by their heads alone. Peasantry happy-looking

and content. Two points particularly struck us



—

82 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

the Drachenfels, and the view at a distance before

coming to Videnhar when the distant hills were

black with the rain. But the whole way it is one of

the finest scenes, I ^imagine, in the world. The large

river with its massy swells and varied towered banks.

We changed horses at Bemagne, and passed over a

road first cut by Aurelius, Theodoric, and Buonaparte.

B's name is everywhere. Who did this ?

N B.—Who that?—He. There

is an inscription to record this. Andernach—a fine

entrance from Bemagne, with its massy towers and

square-spired church. From Andernach we passed

on. Saw on the other side Neuwied, a town owing

its existence to the mere toleration of religion. It

is the finest and  flourishing we have seen since

Ghent and Antwerp. We saw the tomb of Hoche at

a distance ; went to it. There was inscribed " The
army of the Sambre and the Moselle to its general-in-

chief Hoche." The reliefs are torn off, the marble

slabs broken, and it is falling. But

" Glory of the fallen brave
Shall men remember though forgot their grave,''

and the enemies may launch malicious darts against

it. After Andernach the Rhine loses much. The
valley is wider, and the beautiful, after the almost

sublime, palls, and man is fastidious.



About a mile from Coblentz we saw Marceau's tomb
—too dark. Crossed the bridge over the Moselle,

entered Coblentz ; asked of military, no pass ; went to

inns, rascals. Went to the Trois Suisses—well served
;

fine view of Ehrenbreitstein fortress in sight. When
French besieged it, Marceau was here at this inn,

and the cannon-ball pierced it several times.—There

were 84 French officers here, when they would not

believe the Cossacks would pass ; they had to fly as

quick as horses could convey them, for the C,

getting into boats, made their horses swim across.

Cs rascals—ate and drank and never paid.

The general of them mean into the bargain ; for he

sent the waiter in search of a louis he had never

dropped, and went off.—A flying bridge in face

of me.



84 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI





—

EHRENBREITSTEIN 85

May 12.—Got up. Looked at the fine view, and
went to the bath, which was at a maltster's—30

sous. Thence entered a Catholic church—organ

children singing, which had a fine effect. A copy of

Rubens—lineal. Breakfasted.

Mounted a caliche, and went to Marceau's monu-
ment. The tomb of heroes made into a certain place

very much expressed the flickering flame of fame.

Thence to the Chartreuse : deserted, ruined, window-

less, roofless, and tenantless—with another in sight in

the same state. Plenty of reliefs on the roadside

belonging to the Road to Calvary, an oratory on

the hillside, where were many peasants bowing in

reverence. Thence to the flying bridge managed

by boats fastened in the stream with a rope, and

by the rudder.

Saw a motley group of peasants with their head-

dresses of gold and crimson or green with the steel

pin. Cocked hat, blue coat and stockinged heroes

with a fork. Officers, artillery-men, etc. ; crosses given

apparently with as profuse a hand to the soldiers as

to the roadside.

Went to Ehrenbreitstein. Everything broken by

gunpowder; immense masses of solid stone and

mortar thrown fifty yards from their original situation
;

ruined walls, gateways, and halls—nothing perfect.

Splendid views thence—Coblentz, Rhine, Moselle



—

86 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

with its bridge, mountains, cultivation, vines, wilder-

ness, everything below my feet. Mounted again.

Passed the Rhine in a boat (rowed), looking very

like the Otaheitan canoes. Into the carriage—set

off. Scenes increasing in sublimity. The road raised

from the side of the river without parapet : two

precipices coming to the road headlong. Indeed the

river reaches foot to foot—splendid, splendid, splendid.

Saw the fort belonging once to Muhrfrey, where he

raised customs, and resisted in consequence sixty

cities. Arrived at St. Goar. At the first post saw

the people in church ; went to hear them sing

fine.

May 13.—Left St. Goar. Found scenery sublime

to Bingen. Men with cocked hats and great buckles

hacking at the vines. The scenery after Bingen

gains in beauty what it loses in sublimity. Immense
plain to the mounts, with the Rhine in medio,

covered with trees, woods, and forests. Fine road to

Mayence made by Nap ; his name has been

erased from the inscription on the column com-
memorative of the work. Insolence of power !

Mayence a fine town, with a cathedral raised above

it of red sandstone. Bavarians, Austrians, and Prus-

sians, all in the town—belonging to all. The best

town we have seen since Ghent.

.

One of our postillions blew a horn. Saw yesterday

a beautiful appearance—two rainbows, one on the

top of trees where the colours of the foliage pierced

the rainbow-hues.

Arrived at Mayence at 6J. Saw along the Rhine

many fine old castles. This below is what L

B wrote to Mrs. L some days ago

written May 11 on Rhine-banks. See Childe

Harold, from " The Castled Crag of Drachenfels " to

" Still sweeten more these Banks of Rhine." ^

May 14.—From Mayence, where I saw the spot

where they said lately stood the house where printing

was invented ; it had been pulled down by the French.

The gallery I could not see, because the keeper had

taken it into his head to make a promenade. Saw
the cathedral, pierced at the roof by bombs in the

last siege the town underwent. The reliefs—some

of which were in a good style—many decapitated.

There was a German marshal who was represented

as gravely putting forth his powdered head from

1 These are the precise words as they stand in Charlotte

Polidori's transcript. It is to be presumed that Dr. Polidori

wrote them some while after May 13, 1816.



88 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

under a tombstone he has just lifted up—with an

inscription saying " I am here."

From Mayence we went to Mannheim through a
'

fine country. Crossed the Rhine on a bridge of

boats. Taken very ill with a fever at Mannheim-
could not write my Journal.

May 15.—Being a little recovered, set off. Fine

alleys of Lombardy-poplars and horse-chestnuts—

neat villages. Entered Carlsruhe through a grove of

Scotch firs and other trees that had a fine effect.

Saw the Palace.

Entered the inn, and was very ill. Took ipecac,

and op. gr. 15. Headache, vertigo, tendency to faint-

ing, etc. Magnesia and lemon acid—a little better,

no effect.

Went a drive about the town. Saw the neatest

town we have yet met with : the only objection is the

houses stuccoed white—bad for the eyes. Saw the

outside of the Palace, and went into the garden laid

out in the English manner.

Went home : dreadful headaches : ate some stewed

apples ; took some more magn and acid ; had no

effect ; lay down got up after two hours. Was just
;

going out when L B came to take from

my hand a plated candlestick, to give me a brass one.

Got on a few steps ; fainted. My fall brought the

servants to me. Took 4 pills going out again, when
;



CARLSRUHE 89

L B made the servant put down the

plated candlestick, to take up a brass one ; went

to bed.



Medicine had violent effect : better on the whole,

though weak.

Just as we were going out I met Sir C. Hunter at

my chamber-door, who told me he had heard so bad

an account of my positively dying that he came to

enquire how I found myself. I asked him in. He
took care to tell us he was a great friend of the

Grand Duke, who had sent his groom of the stole

(he called it stool) in search of lodgings for the

worthy Mayor ;i gave us a long sermon about

rheumatism, routes, etc. ; left us. In the evening

he sent in the Guide du Voyageur en les pays de

rEurope, begging in return some of L B

poems.

1 I don't understand " Mayor " in this context : should it be
" Mylor " ?



—

go THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

Went out. Saw a church. Columns like firs

Corinthian, golden capitals: loaded everywhere with

gilt, perhaps tawdry, but fine-tawdry. The environs

are beautiful. Drove a great deal about : fine trees

and fine cultivation.

May 1 8.—From Carlsruhe to Offenberg; much
better. Slept halfway: blinds down the other, so

nothing to mention except fine trees, fine cocked

hats, fine women, and yellow-coated postillions.

May 19.—Setoff from Offenberg; saw some scenes

that pleased me much ; hills and clouds upon them
;

woods with mists. Passed through Freiburg, where we
saw the steeple pervious to the top with trellis-work

showing the light, which had to my eyes a beautiful

appearance.

I think Charles, when he said, " The German for his

horse," remembered the G postillions ; for they

talk to theirs, and the horses on their part listen and

seem to understand. The greater part of to-day I

have found the ladies in a strange costume of short

wide red petticoats with many folds, and a hat of

straw as wide as a wheel. Arrived at Krolzingen to

sleep. Left Krolzingen : got to a hill. Fine view

thence : the Alps, the Rhine, the Jura mountains,

and a fine plain before us—fine country. Crossed

the Rhine, and were in Switzerland. The town upon

unequal ground—some parts very high, and some



—

JURA MOUNTAINS 91

low ; the greater part very narrow streets. After tea

went to take a walk : went upon the Rhine bridge

upon a hill in the town .

M^ 2r.—Went to see a panorama of Tliun, the

first Swiss one : crowded foolishly with people, and
too small. Saw a gallery that the artist had formed.

A fine Raphael, not his ; a good Rembrandt, the first

I saw historical ; a Circumcision ; a head of the

caricaturist David ; two heads of Divinity ; a CArist

and Virgin—mere pieces of flesh and drapery.

Went to a marchand d'estampes. Saw there Nelson's

Deaths Chatham's ditto, and other pictures of England.

The Ditiicf of Death has been destroyed : but it was

not Holbein's, but his restorer's. The collection is

dispersed, that once was here, of his paintings.

Agreed with a voiturier to take our carriages to

Geneva in five days. Set off. Country increases

from hills to mountains with great beauty. Passed

through Lipstadt and came to . Went before

supper to climb a hill where we found a goatherd

who could not understand the French that asked for

milk till it had the commentary, " We will pay for it."

The scene was very fine : to the right, beautiful ; to

the left, it had a tendency to sublimity ; on one side,

hills covered to the top with trees ; on the other,

mountains with bald pates. Came down. Found
the servants playing at bowls. They were obliged to



;;

92 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

run the bowls along a narrow board to the men.

Supper: read Arabian Nights ; went to bed.

May 22.—Left at g passed the
; Jura moun-

tains, where we saw some fine castellated scenery,

and women ornamented strangely—amazingly short

petticoats, not below the knee, with black crape

rays round their heads that make them look

very spidery. Soleure is a neat town with stone

fortifications, and a clean church with fountains

before it. The houses in this neighbourhood have

a pleasing strange appearance on account of the

roofs, which slant out on every side a great way.

Immense number of Scotch firs—roads fine. Voi-

turiers slow, and have eight francs of drink-money a

day, being two ; which being too much according

to the Guide du Voyageur en Europe, where it is

said \\ fr., we showed it to our courier, who was
in a passion. Came to , where we slept

May zi.—Left : got a sight of some fine

Alpine snow-capped mountains. Came to Berne
delightfully situated ; beautiful streets with arcades

all their length. Dined there. Saw a splendidly

beautiful view coming down a hill, with hills covered
with fir, ash, beech, and all the catalogue of trees

Morat at the bottom, and the Jura mounts behind,

with snowy hair and cloudy night-caps. Arrived
at Morat ; neat with arcades. Stopped at the Crown



;

AVENCHES 93

inn. All the way had debates whether clouds were
mountains, or mountains clouds.

May 24.—The innkeeper at Morat, being a little

tipsy, and thinking every Englishman (being a

philosophe) must be a philosophe like himself,

favoured us with some of his infidel notions while

serving us at supper. Near Morat was fought the

battle wherein the Burgundians were so completely

thrashed. Their bones, of which we took pieces,

are now very few ; once they formed a mighty

heap in the chapel, but both were destroyed by
the Burgundian division when in Switzerland, and

a tree of liberty was planted over it, which yet

flourishes in all its verdure—the liberty has flown

from the planters' grasp. Saw Aventicum ; there

remains sufficient of the walls to trace the boundaries

of the ancient town ; but of all the buildings, both

for Gods and men, nothing but a column remains,

and that the only remnant for more than a hundred

years. There are mosaic pavements, and even the

streets may be perceived in a dry summer by the

grass being thinner. The mosaic in a barn, probably

once of a temple, was pretty perfect till the Gallic

cavalry came and turned it into a stable. It is

formed of little pieces of black, white, and red bricks

little now remains. There was also a copper vessel

in the middle ; that too has disappeared. The town



;

94 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

is shamefully negligent of the antiquities of their

fathers, for there is another more beautiful and per-

fect mosaic pavement discovered, but which they have

allowed the proprietor to cover again with mould

rather than buy it. We found in a barn heads,

plinths, capitals, and shafts, heaped promiscuously.

The Corinthian-column capital is deeply, sharply, and

beautifully cut. A head of Apollo in all the rude-

ness of first art—a capital of a strange mixed order.

There is the Amphitheatre, hollow yet pretty perfect,

but no stonework visible ; overgrown with trees

the size, my companion told me, was larger than

common. In the town there were some beautiful

fragments of ornament-sculpture incorporated in the

walls ; all marble. In the walls of the church we
sought in vain for the inscription that Mathison

mentions to Julia Alpinula.





:

96 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

I copied the one below on account of its medical

tendency. The letters in this as well as in all the

other inscriptions are formed like our Roman print,

not in the least imperfect "
: Nvminib. Avg. et Genio

Col. I. El. Apollini Sagr. 9. Postum Hermes lib.

Medicis et Professorib, D.S.D."

From Aventicum or Avenches we went to Payerne.

We have seen in many places boys leading goats just

in the antique style. Thence we went to Moudon
—dirty town. Stopped for refreshments. One fine

view we have had all the way, but nothing equal to

the view descending to Morat.

Darkness came on. We saw the Castle wherein

defended himself against the French who
besieged it for a month : looks so weak, it seems a

wonder. The Swiss castles are not nearly so in-

teresting as the Rhine ones. They are very conical-

roofed and no battlements. We saw the lake, but

for a long time doubted whether it was a cloud

below, a mist before, or water beneath us. Entered

Lausanne.

May 25.—Left Lausanne, after having looked at a

bookseller's, who showed me a fine collection of

bad books for four louis. Enquired for Dewar
name not known. We went along the lake, that a

little disappointed me, as it does not seem so broad

as it really is, and the mountains near it, though



J

SfiCHERON 97

covered with snow, have not a great appearance on

account of the height  lake itself. We saw
Mont Blanc in the distance ; ethereal in appearance,

mingling with the clouds ; it is more than 60 miles

from where we saw it. It is a classic ground we go

over. Buonaparte, Joseph, Bonnet, Necker, Stael,

Voltaire, Rousseau, all have their villas (except

Rousseau). Genthoud, Ferney, Coppet, are close

to the road.

,

having put his age down as 100, received a letter

half-an-hour after from I—a thing

that seems worthy of a novel. It begins again to

be the land of the vine. Women, who till the Pays

de Vaud were ugly, improving greatly.

May 26.—After breakfast, and having made up the

accounts to to-day, and having heard that the voi-

turiers made a claim of drink-money all the way
back, we ordered a caliche ; but, happening to go

into the garden, we saw a boat, into which entering,

7



;

98 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

we pushed out upon the Leman Lake. After rowing

some time, happening to come to the ferry, we found

the waiter with a direful look to tell us that it was

pris pour un monsieur Anglais, who happened to be

} We got another, and went out to bathe.

I rode first with L B upon the field of

Waterloo ; walked first to see Churchill's tomb

bathed and rowed first on the Leman Lake.—It did

us much good. Dined ; entered the caleche ; drove

through Geneva, where I saw an effect of building that

pleased me : it was porticoes from the very roof of

the high houses to the bottom.

Went to the house beyond Cologny that belonged

to Diodati. They ask five-and-twenty louis for it a

month. Narrow, not true. The view from his house

is very fine ; beautiful lake ; at the bottom of the

crescent is Geneva. Returned. Pictet called, but

L B said " not at home."



May 27.—Got up; went about a boat; got one for

3 fr. a day ; rowed to Sdcheron. Breakfasted. Got
into a carriage. Went to Banker's, who changed our

money, and afterwards left his card. To Pictet—not

at home. Home, and looked at accounts : bad temper

on my side. Went into the boat, rowed across to Dio-

dati ; cannot have it for three years ; English family.

Crossed again ; I went ; L B back. Get-

ting out, L B met M Wollstonecraft

Godwin, her sister, and Percy Shelley. I got into the

boat into the middle of Leman Lake, and there lay

my length, letting the boat go its way.



Found letter from De Roche inviting me to break-

fast to-morrow ; curious with regard to L B.

Dined ; P S, the author of Queen Mab,

came ; bashful, shy, consumptive ; twenty-six ; sepa-

rated from his wife ; keeps the two daughters of God-
win, who practise his theories ; one L B's.



B paid 15 nap. towards a watch; I, 13:

repeater and minute-hand; foolish watch.



Went to see the house of Madame Necker, 100

a half-year ; came home, etc.



I04 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

May 28.—Went to Geneva, to breakfast with

Dr. De Roche; acute, sensible, a listener to himself;

good clear head. Told me that armies on their

march induce a fever (by their accumulation of

animal dirt, irregular regimen) of the most malig-

nant typhoid kind; it is epidemic. There was a

whole feverish line from Moscow to Metz, and it

spread at Geneva the only almost epidemic typhus

for many years. He is occupied in the erection of

Lancaster schools, which he says succeed well. He
is a Louis Bourbonist. He told me my fever was

not an uncommon one among travellers. He came

home with me, and we had a chat with L

B ; chiefly politics, where of course we differed.

He had a system well worked out, but I hope only

hypothetical, about liberty of the French being

Machiavellianly not desirable by Europe. He pointed

out Dumont in the court, the r6dacteur of Bentham.

Found a letter from Necker to the hotel-master,

asking 100 nap. for three months ; and another

from Pictet inviting L B and any friend

to go with him at 8 to Madame Einard, a connection

of his. We then, ascending our car, went to see

some other houses, none suiting.

When we returned home, Mr. Percy Shelley came
in to ask us to dinner ; declined ; engaged for to-

morrow. We \valked with him, and got into his



;

SECHERON 105

boat, though the wind raised a little sea upon the lake.

Dined at four. Mr. Hentsch, the banker, came in

very polite ; told L B that, when he saw
him yesterday, he had not an idea that he was
speaking to one of the most famous lords of England.

Dressed and went to Pictet's : an oldish man, about

forty-six, tall, well-looking, speaks English well. His

daughter showed us a picture, by a young female

artist, of Madame Lavalli^re in the chapel ; well

executed in pencil—good lights and a lusciously

grieving expression.

Went to Madame Einard. Introduced to a room
where about 8 (afterwards 20), 2 ladies (i more).

L B's name was alone mentioned ; mine,

like a star in the halo of the moon, invisible. L

B not speaking French, M. Einard spoke bad

Italian. A Signor Rossi came in, who had joined

Murat at Bologna. Manly in thought ; admired

Dante as a poet more than Ariosto, and a discussion

about manliness in a language. Told me Geneva

women amazingly chaste even in thoughts. Saw
the Lavalli^re artist. A bonny, rosy, seventy-yeared

man, called Bonstetten, the beloved of Gray and the

correspondent of Mathison.

 B said it was probably built of some
of the stones with which they pelted him.^ The

^ I don't think there was any such stone-pelting in Geneva
it took place elsewhere in Switzerland.



:;

SECHERON 107

walk is deserted. They are now mending their

roads. Formerly they could not, because the

municipal money always went to the public box.

May 29.—Went with Mr. Hentsch to see some
houses along the valley in which runs the Rhone
nothing. Dined with Mr. and Mrs. Percy Shelley

and Wollstonecraft Godwin. Hentsch told us that

the English last year exported corn to Italy to a

great amount.

May 30.—Got up late. Went to Mr. and Mrs.

Shelley ; breakfasted with them ; rowed out to see

a house together. S went from Lucerne with

the two, with merely £26, to England along the

Rhine in bateaux. Gone through much misery,

thinking he was dying ; married a girl for the mere

sake of letting her have the jointure that would

accrue to her ; recovered ; found he could not agree

separated paid Godwin's debts, and seduced his
;

daughter ; then wondered that he would not see him.

The sister left the father to go with the other. Got

a child. All clever, and no meretricious appearance.

He is very clever ; the more I read his Queen Mab,

the more beauties I find. Published at fourteen a

novel; got ^^30 for it; by his second work :£'ioo.

Mab not published.—Went in caleche with L

B to see a house ; again after dinner to leave

cards; then on lake with L B. I, Mrs



io8 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

S, and Miss G, on to the lake till

nine. Drank tea, and came away at ii after con-

fabbing. The batelier went to Shelley, and asked

him as a favour not to tell L B what he

gave for his boat, as he thought it quite fit that

Milord's payment be double; we sent Berger to say

we did not wish for the boat.



May 31.—Breakfasted with Shelley; read Italian

with Mrs. S ; dined ; went into a boat with Mrs.

S, and rowed all night till 9 ; tea'd together

chatted, etc.

June I.—Breakfasted with S; entered a

caleche ; took Necker's house for 100 louis for 8 or

365 days. Saw several houses for Shelley ; one good.

Dined ; went in the boat ; all tea'd together.



Rogers the subject : Ld B thinks good

poet ; malicious. Marquis of Lansdowne being praised

by a whole company as a happy man, having all good,

R said, " But how !

horridly he carves turbot

Ward having reviewed his poems in the Quarterly,

having a bad heart and being accused of learning his

speeches, L B, upon malignantly hinting

to him  how he had been carved, heard him
say "

: I stopped his speaking though by my epigram,

which is

"
' Ward has no heart, they say, but I deny it

He has a heart, and gets his speeches by it.'"

 B writing a poem to his sister

wherein he says, " And when friends e'en paused and

love," etc., Rogers, going to some one, said "
: I don't

know what L B means by pausing; I

called upon him every day." He did this regularly,

telling L B all the bad news with a malig-

nant grin. When L B wrote "Weep,

daughter of a royal line," Rogers came to him one

day, and, taking up the Courier, said "
: I am sure

now you're attacked there ; now don't mind them "
;

and began reading, looking every now and then at

L B with an anxious searching eye, till he

came to "that little poet and disagreeable person,

Mr. Samuel—" when he tore the paper, and said

" Now this must be that fellow Crofter," and wished

L B to challenge him. He talked of going

to Cumberland with L B, and, asking him

how he meant to travel, L B said " With

four horses." Rogers went to company, and said

" It is strange to hear a man talking of four horses

who seals his letters with a tallow candle."

Shelley is another instance of wealth inducing

relations to confine for madness, and was only saved

by his physician being honest. He was betrothed



—

SECHERON 113

from a boy to his cousin, for age ; another came who
had as much as he would have, and she left him
" because he was an atheist." When starving, a friend

to whom he had given ;^2000, though he knew it, would

not come near him. Heard Mrs. Shelley repeat

Coleridge on Pitt, which persuades me he is a poet.





:

ii6 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

A young girl of eighteen, handsome, died within

half-an-hour yesterday : buried to-day. Geneva is

fortified—legumes growing in the fosses.—Went
about linen and plate.

June 2.—Breakfasted with Shelley. Read Tasso

with Mrs. Shelley. Took child for vaccination.



Eound gates shut because of church-service. Went
in search of Rossi. Saw a village where lads and lasses,

soubrettes and soldiers, were dancing, to a tabor and
drum, waltzes, cotillons, etc. Dr. R not at home.



—a

SfiCHERON U7

Dined with S ; went to the lake with them

and L B. Saw their house ; fine. Coming
back, the sunset, the mountains on one side, a dark

mass of outline on the other, trees, houses hardly

visible, just distinguishable ; a white light mist, rest-

ing on the hills around, formed the blue into a

circular dome bespangled with stars only and lighted

by the moon which gilt the lake. The dome of

heaven seemed oval. At lo landed and drank tea.

Madness, Grattan, Curran, etc., subjects.

, or anything that,

from being her physician, comes to his knowledge.

Afterwards had tea and politics. Saw there a Dr.

Gardner, whom I carried home in the caleche. Odier

invited me for every Wednesday.

Came home. Went on the lake with Shelley and

Lord Byron, who quarrelled with me,

 ; and

on one occasion, suffering from the cruel wrong of

having been a loser in a sailing-match, he went so

far as to send Shelley a challenge, which was received

with a fit of becoming laughter. ' Recollect,' said

Byron, ' that, though Shelley has some scruples about

duelling, I have none and shall be at all times ready



SECHERON 119

to take his place.' " Professor Dowden does not define

the date when this squabble occurred ; but the con-

text in which he sets it suggests a date anterior to

June 22, when Byron and Shelley started off on their

week's excursion upon the Lake of Geneva. The
very curt narrative of Polidori does not however in-

dicate any sailing-match, nor any challenge, whether
" sent " or verbally delivered at the moment ; and

perhaps it may be more reasonable to suppose that

this present quarrel with Byron was a different affair

altogether—an instance when Polidori happened to

strike Byron's knee with an oar. I shall recur to

the duelling matter farther on.]

June $.—At 12 went to Hentsch about Diodati;

thence to Shelley's. Read Tasso. Home in caleche.

Dined with them in the public room : walked in the

garden. Then dressed, and to Odier's, who talked

with me about somnambulism. Was at last seated,

and conversed with some G6nevoises : so so—too

fine. Quantities of English ; speaking amongst

themselves, arms by their sides, mouths open and

eyes glowing ; might as well make a tour of the

Isle of Dogs. Odier gave me yesterday many
articles of Bibliotheque—translated and ridiges by

himself, and to-day a manuscript on somnambulism.



June 6.—At i up—breakfasted. With Lord Byron
in the caleche to Hentsch, where we got the paper

making us masters of Diodati for six months to

November i for 125 louis.



Thence to Shelley : back : dinner. To Shelley in

boat : driven on shore : home. Looked over inventory

and Berger's accounts. Bed.

June 7.—Up at . Pains in my loins and languor

in my bones. Breakfasted—looked over inventory.

Saw L B at dinner ; wrote to my father

and Shelley ; went in the boat with L B
;

agreed with boatman for English boat. Told us

Napoleon had caused him to get his children. Saw
Shelley over again.



June 8.—Up at 9 ; went to Geneva on horseback,

and then to Diodati to see Shelley ; back ; dined
;

into the new boat—Shelley's,—and talked, till the

ladies' brains whizzed with giddiness, about idealism.

Back ; rain puffs of wind. Mistake.
;

June 9.—Up by i : breakfasted. Read Lucian.

Dined. Did the same : tea'd. Went to Hentsch

came home. Looked at the moon, and ordered

packing-up.

June 10.—Up at 9. Got things ready for going to

Diodati ; settled accounts, etc. Left at 3 ; went to

Diodati; went back to dinner, and then returned.

Shelley etc. came to tea, and we sat talking till 11.

My rooms are so :

Picture-gallery.

Bedroom

June 1 1.—Wrote home and to Pryse Gordon. Read

Lucian. Went to Shelley's ; dined ; Shelley in the

evening with us.



122 THE DIARY OF POLIDORl

June 12.—Rode to town. Subscribed to a circulat-

ing library, and went in the evening to Madame
Odier. Found no one. Miss 0, to make time

pass, played the Ranz des Vaches—plaintive and war-

like. People arrived. Had a confab with Dr. O.

about perpanism,^ etc. Began dancing : waltzes, cotil-

lons, French country-dances and English ones : first

time I shook my feet to French measure. Ladies all

waltzed except the English : they looked on frown-

ing. Introduced to Mrs. Slaney : invited me for next

night. You ask without introduction ; the girls refuse

those they dislike. Till 12. Went and slept at the

Balance.

June 13.—Rode home, and to town again. Went
to Mrs. Slaney : a ball. Danced and played at chess.

Walked home in thunder and lightning: lost my
way. Went back in search of some one—fell upon

the police. Slept at the Balance.

June 14.—Rode home—rode almost all day. Dined

with Rossi, who came to us ; shrewd, quick, manly-

minded fellow ; like him very much. Shelley etc. fell

in in the evening.

June it^.—Up late; began my letters. Went to

Shelley's. After dinner, jumping a wall my foot

' The word written is perpanism, or possibly perhanism. Is

there any such word, medical or other ? Should it perchance be
Pyrrhonism ?



;

VILLA DIODATI 123

slipped and I strained my left ankle. Shelley etc.

came in the evening ; talked of my play etc., which

all agreed was worth nothing. Afterwards Shelley

and I had a conversation about principles,—whether

man was to be thought merely an instrument.



June 1 6.—Laid up. Shelley came, and dined and

slept here, with Mrs. S and Miss Clare

Clairmont. Wrote another letter.





—;

VILLA DIODATI 125

June 17.—Went into the town ; dined with Shelley

etc. here. Went after dinner to a ball at Madame
Odier's ; where I was introduced to Princess Something

and Countess Potocka, Poles, and had with them
a long confab. Attempted to dance, but felt such

horrid pain was forced to stop. The ghost-stories

are begun by all but me.

 some volumes of

ghost-stories, Fantasmagoriana, ou Recueil d'Histoires

d^Apparitions, de Spectres, Revenans, etc. (a collection



—

126 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

translated into French from the German) fell into

their hands, and its perusal probably excited and

overstrained Shelley's imagination." Professor Dow-
den then proceeds to narrate an incident connected

with Coleridge's Christabel, of which more anon ; and

he says that immediately after that incident Byron

proposed, " We will each write a ghost-story " &

suggestion to which the others assented. It is only

fair to observe that Professor Dowden's account corre-

sponds with that which Polidori himself supplied in the

proem to his tale of The Vampyre. But Polidori's

Diary proves that this is not absolutely correct.

The ghost-stories (prompted by the Fantasmagoriana,

a poor sort of book) had already been begun by Byron,

Shelley, Mrs. Shelley, and Miss Clairmont, not later

than June 17, whereas the ChristabelmciAe.rA happened

on June 18. Byron's story, as I have already said,

was The Vampyre, left a fragment ; Shelley's is stated

to have been some tale founded on his own early

sxperiences—nothing farther is known of it ; Mrs.

Shelley's was eventually Frankenstein, but, from the

details which have been published as to the first con-

ception of this work, we must assume that what she

had begun by June 17 was something different : of

Miss Clairmont's story no sort of record remains.

The Countess Potocka, whom Polidori mentions,

was a lady belonging to the highest Polish nobility.



VILLA DIODATI 127

grand-niece of Stanislaus Augustus Poniatowski,

who had been King of Poland up to 1798. She

was daughter of Count Tyszkiewicz, and married

Count Potocki, and afterwards Count Wonsowicz.

Born in 1776, she lived on to 1867, when she died

in Paris, a leader of society under the Second Empire.

Thus she was forty years old when Polidori saw

her. She wrote memoirs of her life, going up to

1820 : a rather entertaining book, dealing with many
important transactions, especially of the period of

Napoleon I : she gives one to understand that this

supreme potentate was rather susceptible to her

charms, but a rival compatriot, the Countess Wa-
lewska, was then in the ascendant. I have seen

reproductions from two portraits of the Countess

Potocka, both of them ascribed to Angelica Kauff-

man : one of these shows a strikingly handsome

young woman, with dark eyes of singular brilliancy

and sentiment. Its date cannot be later than 1807,

when the painter died, and may probably be as

early as 1800.]

June 18.—My leg much worse. Shelley and party

here. Mrs. S called me her brother (younger).

Began my ghost-story^ after tea. Twelve o'clock,

1 The "ghost-story" which Polidori published was The
Vampyre: see p. 128 as to his having begun in the first in-

stance some different story.



128 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

really began to talk ghostly. L B re-

peated some verses of Coleridge's Christabel, of the

witch's breast ; when silence ensued, and Shelley,

suddenly shrieking and putting his hands to his head,

ran out of the room with a candle. Threw water in

his face, and after gave him ether. He was looking

at Mrs. S, and suddenly thought of a woman
he had heard of who had eyes instead of nipples,

which, taking hold of his mind, horrified him.—He
married ; and, a friend of his liking his wife, he tried

all he could to induce her to love him in turn. He is

surrounded by friends who feed upon him, and draw

upon him as their banker. Once, having hired a

house, a man wanted to make him pay more, and

came trying to bully him, and at last challenged him.

Shelley refused, and was knocked down ; coolly said

that would not gain him his object, and was knocked

down again.—Slaney called.



June 19.—Leg worse ; began my ghost-story. Mr.

S etc. forth here. Bonstetten and Rossi

called. B told me a story of the religious

feuds in Appenzel ; a civil war between Catholics and

Protestants. Battle arranged ; chief advances ; calls

the other. Calls himself and other fools, for battles

will not persuade of his being wrong. Other agreed,

and persuaded them to take the boundary rivulet

they did. Bed at 3 as usual.

June 20.—My leg kept me at home. Shelley etc.

here.

June 21.—Same.

June 22.—L B and Shelley went to

Vevay ; Mrs. S and Miss Clare Clairmont

to town. Went to Rossi's—had tired his patience.

Called on Odier ; Miss reading Byron.



June 23.—Went to town ; apologized to Rossi.

Called on Dr. Slaney etc. Walked to Mrs. Shelley.



VILLA DIODATI 133

Pictet, Odier, Slaney, dined with me. Went down to

Mrs. S for the evening. Odier mentioned

the cases of two gentlemen who, on taking the nitrate

of silver, some time after had a blacker face. Pictet

confirmed it.

June 24.—Up at 12. Dined down with Mrs.

S and Miss C C.



June 26.—Up. Mounted on horseback : went to

town. Saw Mrs. Shelley: dined. To Dr. Rossi's

party of physicians : after at Mrs. S.

June 27.—Up at Mrs. Shelley's : dined. No caliche

arrived : walked to G. No horses : ordered

saddle-horse. Walked to Rossi's—gone. Went to

the gate : found him. Obliged to break off the



;

134 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

appointment. Went to Odier's. Met with Mr. ,

a friend of Lord Byron's father. Invited me to his

house : been a long time on the Continent. Music,

ranz des vaches, beautiful. Rode two hours ; went

to Mrs. S ; Miss C talked of a

soliloquy.



June 28.—All day at Mrs. S.

June 29.—Up at i ; studied ; down at Mrs.

S.

June 30.—Same.

July I.—Went in caleche to town with Mrs.

S and C for a ride, and to mass (which

we did not go to, being begun). Dined at i. Went
to town to Rossi. Introduced to Marchese Saporati

together to Mr. Saladin of Vaugeron, Countess

Breuss, Calpnafur ; and then to a party of ladies.



Found Lord Byron and Shelley returned.

July 2.—Rain all day. In the evening to Mrs.

S.

September 5.—Not written my Journal till now
through neglect and dissipation. Had a long explanation

with S and L B about my conduct

to L B ; threatened to shoot S one

day on the water. Horses been a subject of quarrel

twice, Berger having accused me of laming one.

 B went to town in pursuit of thieves

who came to steal the anchors after having stolen my
sail. Was refused permission to go out. I went to

the Syndic Saladin, and told him I begged his pardon

for our servants, who must have said something in-

sulting, or else he could not have refused permission

to leave the port. Thieves attempted to break into

the house.

An apothecary sold some bad magnesia to L

B. Found it bad by experiment of sulphuric

acid colouring it red rose-colour. Servants spoke

about it. Appointed Castan to see experiment;

came ; impudent ; refused to go out ; collared him,

sent him out, broke spectacles. Laid himself on a

wall for three hours ; refused to see experiments.

Saw L B, told him his tale before two
physicians. Brought me to trial before five judges

;

had an advocate to plead. I pleaded for myself;

laughed at the advocate. Lost his cause on the plea

of calumny ; made me pay 12 florins for the broken

spectacles and costs. Magnesia chiefly alumina, as

proved by succenate^ and carbonate of ammonia.
* Word obscurely written.



;;

COPPET 137

Dined twice at Madame de Stael's ; visited there

also ; met Madame de Broglie and M ; Miss

Randall ; two Roccas ; Schlegel ; Monsignor Brema
Dumont ; Bonstetten ; Madame Bottini ; Madame
Mongelas young de Stael.

;



At Vaugeron, the Saladins, Auguste Mathould,

Rossi, Jacques Naple , Brelaz, Clemann, Countess

Mouskinpouskin, Breuss, Abate Gatelier, Toffettheim

e figlio, Foncet, Saussure, Lord Breadalbane and



I40 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

family, a ball; Saladin of Maligny, Slaneys, two

balls ; Dr. and Mrs. Freckton White, Galstons (Miss

etc. sisters), a ball ; Lord Bingham, Lord F. Cunning-

ham, Lord Belgray, a ball ; Mr. Tillotson St. Aubyn,

Mrs. Trevanion, Valence Meers, R. Simmons, Lloyd,

Princess Jablonski, Lady Hamilton Dalrymple,

Odiers, Lord Kinnoul, Somers, Lord Glenorchy, Mr.

Evans, Coda (songstress), M. G. Lewis, Mrs. Davies,

Mr. Pictet, Mr. Hobhouse, Dr. Gardner, Caravella,

Shelleys, Sir John St. Aubyn.

's army, knew
nothing of the matter. She asked to have the fating

of him. They acted first a charade on the canton of

Genthoud. She acted with Mr. Massey junior, with

others, and myself as a woman—the words to blind.^

Then came a kind of farce, in which Charles was

dressed as the C. B. , Gatelier as

the Abb6, and Miss Saladin as Gatelier : each took

one another off. Written by C. B. When at last

another of the society brought a letter announcing it

to be Charles' birthday. Then they, while he was in

his amazement, sang a song to him, presented him

with a bouquet and purse. Then an elegant supper,

and afterwards a ball on the arrival of Madame
Toffettheim with her son. A great party was invited

and after tea two plays were acted Le Pachd, de

' " Blind" appears to be the word written. It seems an odd
expression—meaning, I suppose, "to blind (mislead or puzzle)

the auditors."



—;;

GENTHOUD 143

Suresne and Les Ricochets. There was an immense

number of spectators. The actors were, in Le Pachd,

de Suresne, Madame Dorsan, la Comtesse Breuss

Laure, Madlle. Brelaz ; Agla^ Clemann ; Nathalie,

M. ; Madlle. Remy, Madame Gatelier ; Perceval, Alexis

Saladin ; Flicflac, Polidori Joseph, C. Saladin.
;

Les Ricochets—I do not remember the characters.

The actors were Alexis, Charles, Auguste Saladin,

Massey le jeune, La Comtesse Breuss, Madame
Mathilde Saladin. The rehearsals before were

frequent.

I got a discretion from the Countess, which I took

in the shape of a Swiss,^ in consequence of a wager

that I could not go straight home.

La Toffettheim is a nice, unpretending, lady-like

woman, pleasing and affectionate. Her son full of

liberty-ideas. It was here, in consequence of Massey

junior dancing extremely well, that, being defied, I

danced a pantaloon-dance, by which I made enemies

for, upon my refusing it at the Saladins', they thought

it was a personal refusal. Saladins of Vaugeron,

father and mother. Father deaf, good-natured : said

to me upon reading my thesis, " Mais, Monsieur, il

n'y a pas de paradoxe." The mother pretended to

play shy on account of Madame B.

^ This, again, is not clear to me : something in the nature of

a game of forfeits may be indicated.



— ;

144 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

 pretended prude in mine and

Madame B.'s case, while she herself has got Mr.

Massey junior dangling, not unheard, after her.

Charles a good boisterous soldier, at Leipzig, Nassau,

and 1 3 ingwen  ^ Waterloo business. Makes up for

wit by noise, for affection by slaps on the back. On
his birthday I addressed him with (after supper)

"Jeune guerrier dans I'armfe du premier des heros,

Dans la cause de la France dddaignant le repos.

Que la chute de vos ans soit tranquille et heureuse,

Comme fut I'aube de vos jours dclatante et glorieuse."



Auguste, a simple neat fool, despising learning

because he is noble and has enough to live upon
content to dangle, with a compliment and a sentiment,

after a woman's tail. Alexis, so so, good-naturedly

ignorant husband to Mathilde. Massey senior, active

* So written : should it be " Bingwen " or something of the
kind?



—

GENTHOUD 145

pleasant man, excellent fencer and dancer— been
secretary to Bertrand. Massey junior, confident,

impudent, insolent, ignorant puppy. Saladins of

Maligny, neither good nor bad, rich : to gain a little

more, let their villa to Lord Breadalbane, and retired

to a cottage, though both old and only one ugly vain

daughter. Lord Breadalbane, an excellent, good-

sensed though not quick man : answered—when the

Duke of Bedford said to him, " What would you give

to have the Breadalbane estate in Bedfordshire?"

"Why, your Grace, I should be sorry if my estate

would go in Bedfordshire." Gave a very good ball

at which I was. His son Lord Glenorchy, good, shy,

not brilliant young man. His lady not spoken to.

His daughter excellent dancer, rather haughty. Mr.

Evans, a good sensible man, biassed in his thoughts

by his cassock. At the society he took up the im-

mortality: Lord Glenorchy gave a positive No.

Saussure, Mrs., a wax talkative figure. Mr., a

would-be scientific gentleman : thought me a fool

because I danced pantaloon, and himself a wise man
because he knows the names of his father's stones.

Jacquet, Madlle., got half in love with her,—no, her

8000 a year : her face and bad-singing exposures

cured me. Foncet, officer of the Piedmontese troops,

jealous of him.

Brelaz, Portuguese lady,—in love with her ; I think



;:;

146 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

fond of me too ; imprudent ; her daughter also against

me on account of it ; shows it too much publicly

very jealous ; her daughters, sprightly good-looking

girls. Clemann—got half in love with her; nice

daughter. The Cavalier pleasing. Had a dispute in

a public ball with her two fools. One of the Saladins,

Auguste, courts her, and she laughs ; she excites love

in every young man's breast. Miss Harriet is rather

too serious for her age, pretty and well-informed in

novels and romances, and rather too sentimental.

Cavalier's Marianne is a fine hoydenish creature

applies when studying, and romps when playing.

Madame de Stael I have dined with three times
;

she is better, those who know her say, at home than

abroad. She has married poor Rocca. She talks

much ; would not believe me to be a physician pre-
;

sented her my thesis, which she told me she had read

with pleasure. Talked about religion, and puts down
every  of Rocca. Ugly good eyes. Writing on

;

the French Revolution polite, affable ; lectures, and
;

tells all to L B. Madame de Broglie, her

daughter, a beautiful, dirty-skinned woman pleasant,
;

soft-eyed speaker ; dances well, waltzes. Schlegel, a

presumptuous literato, contradicting d outrance ; a

believer in magnetism. Rocca, a talkative, good-

natured, beautiful man, with a desire for knowledge

the author of Walcheren and Espagne ; excellent at



COPPET 147

naive description. Rocca, the judge, very clever and

quick, rising ; know little of him. Been seven years

in the courtship of Miss Saladin ; she neither refuses

nor accepts him, but keeps him in her train. Miss

Randall, sister to Mrs. Norgate. Monsignor Brema,

friend of Ugo Foscolo, enthusiastic for Italy, encomiast

in all, Grand Almoner of Italy, hater of Austrians.

Dumont, a thick, heavy-thoughted body, editor of

Bentham. Bonstetten, friend of Gray.

The first time L B went, there was Mrs.

Hervey there ; talkative, sister and a great friend of

the Noels ; she thought proper to faint out of the

house, though her curiosity brought her back to speak

with him.

Bonstetten told me that, upon his saying to Gray

that he must be happy, he took and read to him the

criticism of Johnson, which happens to have been

written after Gray's death ; he used to go in the

evening to tea, and remain all night reading the

English authors with him. Gray introduced him to

society ;^ and, one of the professors having asked him

if he understood what he said, he replied he thought

1 The word " society " is perfectly clear in Charlotte Polidori's

transcript. From the context, I question whether it ought not

to be "Shakespear." As to "the criticism of Johnson" on Gray
in the Lives ofthe Poets, many of my readers will recollect that

this criticism is somewhat adverse, Gray being treated as a rather

nebulous writer.



";

148 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

so, but very di£f

Gray, hearing this, showed B some pas-

sages to ask him, which B did in a public

company, complimenting him upon  known
knowledge ; when all the company, one after the

other, began contradicting the Professor's opinion.

Then B, turning to him, said, " You perhaps

thought you understood Shakespear." Gray told

him that there was none who could petfectly under-

stand him.

Rossi, an Italian of about thirty, pleasant, agree-

able, and good-natured, professor at Bologna, thence

obliged to fly with two others. One of his companions

was beginning his lecture, when the students called

out, " No lecture, but an improvise upon the liberty

of Italy "
; as he was an improvisatore. He objected,

as, on account of Murat's approach, it might be sus-

picious. They insisted, and the professors at hand

said, "No harm if not upon present circumstances."

He did it, and the students issued forth to join Murat
they had however made up their minds to do so

before. Rossi joined it more openly and loudly, and

was obliged to fly. He wrote a memoir to defend

himself, in which he said it was only to avoid the

Roman dominion, and give it to the Archduke ; who
told him that he had better write another, as Bologna
was already ceded to Pius. When he was ruined thus



GENTHOUD 149

partially he wrote to the father of his betrothed, to

say that he must not (if he chose) think himself bound

by his promise, as he was not in the same circum-

stances as when the promise was given. The father

did retract. So far a man of honour. Now how to

reconcile his being with Calandion, a magistrate of

G violent on the other side ? who says he has

made a good profession to him, and at the same time

professing other opinions to others.

Gave me a letter to Milan, and by him I have been

introduced to Saporiti, a good, enthusiastic, ignorant

Italian. Talked of the English landing 100,000

soldiers here and there, as if they were so many
peas.

Slaneys : the husband jealous of every one—Cam-
bridge degree. When I danced with his wife, he

after, when walking with her, came up and gave an

arm too. The wife beautiful, but very simple.

Galston, Miss, very beautiful.

" Genevan Liberal Society " is a muster of Enghsh-

men for debate on speculative questions. Twice

there. Immortality, accomplice's evidence. The

members whom I knew were—Lord Kinnoul, a most

tiresome, long-winded, repeating, thick-headed would-

be orator, Lord Conyngham.



Mr. Somers, good head enough. Valence, whom I

cried to hear ; and, meeting me after at Chamounix,

the first thing he asked me was, " Why did you laugh

at me ? " St. Aubyn, Lloyd, Slaney.

Lloyd, of good Welsh blood, his original name
Ap Griffith, rode out. We went out visiting one

day, and, in returning in his gig, he touched a horse

of a row of carts. The carter struck me upon my
back with his whip ; I jumped down, and six jumped
at me. I fortunately was between a wheel and a

hedge, so that they all could not reach. Lloyd,

seeing this, jumped down also ; then three left me
and went to him, and another untied a piece of his

wagon with which, while I defended myself from
the two (one with a whip), he struck me while

fortunately my arm was striking a blow, so that it

did but just touch my face. He lifted again; I

sprang back, and with all the force of my leap struck

him with my fist in his face. His blow fell to the

ground, and with his hand to his nose he retreated.

They then seized stones to throw, but we closed with

them ; they could not throw above two, when we



SWITZERLAND 151

saw an English carriage we knew coming. We
called, they came, and immediately the boisterous

 were calm. Some who tried to divide us

got blows also.

St. Aubyn, an excellent fellow, introduced me to

his father at Genthoud : is a natural son, studying

for the Church. His father is a good polite man,

according to the "go" school.^ Keeps a mistress

now, though sixty-five years : has many children by
different mistresses.

At Dr. Odier's—who is a good old, toothless,

chatty, easy-believing man — there was a society

every Wednesday, where I went sometimes. They
danced, sang, ate cakes, and drank tea ; English

almost entirely, changing every Wednesday.—Went
to a concert of Madamigella Coda—the theatre dirty.

When Mr. Hobhouse and Davies arrived, we went

to Chamounix. The first day through Chesne, Anne-
masse, Vetra, Nangy, Contamine, Bonneville (dinner),

Cluses, Sallenches (slept). Next day by Chede in

two ckar-d-bancs, with each a guide ; a fine pine-glen

of the Arve, to Chamounix. We went that evening

over the Brisson, and to the source of the Aveyron.

Next day so bad we left, and returned to Sallenches,

taking the fall of Chede in our way ; thence to

' Seems rather an odd phrase, but I suppose correctly

transcribed.



152 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

Diodati. Mr. Scrape Davies played against the

marker at tennis: then went, taking Rushton with

him. 

L B determined upon our parting,—not

upon any quarrel, but on account of our not suiting.

Gave me £yo; 50 for 3 months and 20 for voyage.

Paid away a great deal, and then thought of setting

off: determined for Italy. Madame de Stael gave

me three letters. Madame B wept, and most

seemed sorry.



The night before I went, at Madame B's,

they acted Cest le Mime extremely well ; a Lausanne

girl acting the lady very well. The costumes also

extremely good. Wished nobody good-bye : told

them, though, I was going. Set off with 47 louis,

112 naps.

Le Valais from Schiirer's book, Description du
Departement du Simplon, 1812, lent me by the

Cav. See elsewhere.

September 16.—Left Cologny and Lord Byron at

six in the morning. Breakfasted at Doraine, 3

leagues. Dined, Thouson, ditto. Evrein, 2. Slept

St. Gingoux, 4. Passed Meillerie. Saw Lausanne



SWITZERLAND 153

at a distance, right through this part of Sardinian

King's dominions. Read Madame Brelaz's verses.

Wept—not at them, but at the prose.

September 17.—Left St. Gingoux at 6. Walked
to .1 Took bread and wine. Crossed to Chillon.

Saw Bonivard's prison for six years ; whence a

Frenchman had broken, and, passing through a

window, swam to a boat. Instruments of torture,

—the pulley. Three soldiers there now : the Roman
arms already affixed. Large subterranean passes.

Saw in passing the three treed islands. The Rhone
enters by two mouths, and keeps its waters distinct

for two stones' throw.

From Chillon I went to Montreaux—breakfasted

—leaving Charney on my left. I began to mount
towards the Dent de Jamanu. Before beginning to

mount Jamanu itself, one has a beautiful view, seeing

only part of the lake, bound by Meillerie, Roches,

and the Rhone. Higher up the view is more

extensive, but not so beautiful—nothing being dis-

tinct ; the water looking merely as an inlet of sky,

but one could see the Jura as far as Genthoud.

I entered a chalet, where they expressed great

astonishment at my drinking whey, which they give

to their pigs only. Refused at first money.

1 A name is written here, but so obscurely that I leave it out.

It somewhat resembles " Neravois," or " the ravois."



154 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

Descended towards Mont Boyon. • What owing to

the fatigue and hardly meeting any one, sick with

grief. At Mont Boyon dined, and, finding they

would not dance, slept immediately after.

September i8.—Up at 4. Drank wine and bread.

At 6 set off. Passed the Chateau d'Ox where there

was a fair. After that, hardly met a soul. Always

on the side of the mountains, each side of a river

or torrent ; with torrent-beds, pine-forests, chalets,

villages without a visible soul—all at work—and ups

and downs : so that this road, if I had not had that

of yesterday, I should have called the worst in the

world. Passed through Chateau d'Ox ; Rougemont,

breakfast ; Zwezermann, dinner ; Gessenay ; Lam-
beck ; Reichenstein ; Weissenbach ; Bottingen, tea

and night. The French language leaves off at

Gessenay (rather, patois), and they begin their

German : found it difficult to go on.

September 19.—Got up at 4J. Set off from Bottingen.

Went through Obernoyle. Breakfasted at Wyssen-
bach : refused my money. Went to the Doctor,

who charged me a nap. Went through Erlenbach,

Lauterbach, Meiningen, to Thun. Splendid scenery;

especially the first look at the Lake by the river's

mouth, and the pass into a great valley. Took
dinner, and then a warm bath. Arrived at i o'clock.

All the houses are of wood, the foundation only



—

SWITZERLAND 155

being stone : great cut ornaments between the rows
of windows : the wood, fir. Felt very miserable,

especially these two last days : only met two persons

to whom I could speak—the others all Germans.
At Wyssenbach they all said grace before breakfast,

and then ate out of the same dish ; remarking (as

I understood them) that I, not being a Catholic,

would laugh.



September 20.—Got up at 6. Wrote to St. Aubyn,

Brelaz, father, Vacca, and Zio, asking letters; to my
father, to announce my parting.

 ^ and

the best-cultivated fields I ever saw. The lake some-

times some hundred precipitous feet below my feet ; at

other times quite close to its edge ; boats coming from

the fair picturesque towered villages ; fine Alps on
;

the other side, the Jungfrau and others far off. The
bottom of the lake is especially magnificent. Lost

my way, and had two little children as guides back

again. One small cascade of seven or eight fountains.

Arrived at 7 at Unterseen : through Nilterfingen,

Oberhofen, Rottingen, Morlangen, Neuchaus, to

Unterseen. Found two Englishmen at supper : sat

down with them. Very miserable all the morning.

September 21.—Got up at 6, having determined to

go with the two to the Grindenwald in a char-ci-banc,

on account of the state of my foot. I went to the

bridge at Interlachen to see the view coming

between two beautiful isolated crags. Going, met

a man, a mardchal, who had been to Vienna and

Bohemia en roulant after his apprenticeship, to see

the world—stopping a day at one place, a day at

another. Returned, breakfasted : and then, after

^ Should this be " glaciers " ?



—;

SWITZERLAND 157

growling at the innkeeper's wishing us to take two
horses, we went off through splendid pine-clad craggy

valleys through Zweihitschirne to Lauterbrunner

whence to the fall of the Staubach, a bare cataract

of 900 feet high, becoming vapour before it arrives

appearing much, and ending in a little stream. The
curate of this village receives guests : there were the

Prince Saxe-Gotha and family. We lunched at the

inn, and went back to Lauterbrunner after having

looked at the Jungfrau at a distance.

Went from Zweihitschirne to the Grindenwald

with the Saxe-Gotha before us, through a more

beautiful valley. Saw the glaciers come into it,

with the Eiger, Wetterhprn, and other mountains,

most magnificent. Walking about, found two girls

who gave us cherries and chatted freely. Found
that mules were 18 francs a day. A party came
in in the dark at 8 with guides, hallooing and making

a lively sound. Dined at 7, and talked about mules,

hoping to get return ones etc.

September 22.—Got up. Could not get mules under

18 francs: my foot too bad to walk. Went with

Captain Rice and others back to Interlachen. Got

into a boat rowed by two men and a boy. Went
by Brientz, Calne, to the Griesbach cascade, and

then to Brientz—wilder, but not so beautiful as the

Lake of Thun. The cascade I did not mount to see



158 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

on account of my foot. At Brientz an old woman
would give us her presence and conversation till one

of my companions courted the daughter. Met be-

tween Grindenwald and Interlachen L B

and Mr. H : we saluted.

September 23.—Got up at 4. Tired of my company
;

and, finding the expense more than I could afford, I

went to their bedrooms to wish them good-bye. Set

off at 5^ ; and through fine copse-wooded crags,

along the Aar, with cascades on every side, to

Meyringen ; where I breakfasted with two Germans,

an old and a young artist—the old, chatty. Bought

a pole. Went to see the Reichenbach, a fine cascade

indeed. Thence through the beautiful vale of Nach-

im - Grunden, where for a moment I planned a

sovereignty ; but, walking on, my plans faded before

I arrived at Guttannen, where I dined.

Rode all the way to-day—horrible, only passable

for men and mules : it is the way to St. Gothard.

The road is merely huge unequal masses of granite

thrown in a line not the straightest. From Guttannen

the road went through the wildest and most sublime

scenery I ever read of: vegetation less and less, so

that, instead of grass, there was moss ; then nothing.

Instead of trees, shrubs ; then nothing—huge granite

rocks leaving hardly room for the road and river.

The river's bed the most magnificent imaginable, cut



SWITZERLAND 159

deep and narrow into the solid rock, sinuous, and

continually accompanied by cascades, and amazing

bold and high single-arched bridges. Snow covering

in some parts the whole bed of the river, and so thick

and strong that even huge stones have fallen without

injuring its crust. There are only two houses between

Guttannen and the Hospital : one, a chalet wherein

I entered ; the other, a cow-herd's. Arrived at 6

o'clock precisely, having walked in only 9J hours 30

miles at least.



The Hospital is an old stone ugly building, con-

sonant with the wild scene, where the poor are lodged

for nothing ; others, us,  an inn.

September 24.—On account of rain did not get up

till 7. Set off across the Grimsel, a dreary mountain

with snow in every hollow—5000 feet above the

Four-canton Lake. Descended on the other side to

Obergustellen, where I breakfasted at 10. Thence



i6o THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

through Verlican, Guesquerman, Munster, Rexingen,

Biel, Blizzen ; where, out of the dead flat valley, I

began to mount, and the scenery ' began to increase

in beauty. One bridge especially over the Rhone,

which fell between two clefts' sides, was beautiful.

Sinderwald, Viesch, pine-wood ; sax (?) along the

rocks, and fine path along the mountain. Very fine,

though continued hard rain, which drenched me and

hindered my seeing a great deal. To Morel, where I

went to bed, and ate a kind of dinner in bed at 7 o'clock.

September 25.—Up at S ; my foot, from having

been obliged to walk with the shoe down at heel,

very much swelled and too painful to walk. Break-

fast. Two students from Brieg, of the Jesuits'

College, came in, who had during the vacations been

beyond Constance with only two ecus neufs in their

pockets. It costs them ten batsches a year at

College. Impudent one : the other modest-looking,

but, when I gave him six francs because he had no

more money, he asked me for more on other accounts.

The Jesuits been restored two years.

At Brieg ^ I sent for the curate, a good old man
of sixty. We conversed together in Latin for two
hours ; not at all troublesome in enquiries, but kind

in answering them. The Valaisians resisted two

^ This name is illegibly written : I can only suppose that it

must be meant for Brieg.



BRIEG i6i

years against the French in 93. It was the only

part of the country in which they did so, except

Unterwalden, and then it was only the peasants, and
in every village there was a French party. The
cruelty of the French was dreadful ; they stuck their

prisoners in a variety of ways like sheep. One old

man of eighty, who had never left his house but

whom they found eating, they strangled, and then

put meat and bottles by him as if he had died

apoplectic. They fought very hard and bravely, but

such was the power of numbers united to the force

of treachery that they were obliged to yield. In

18
1 3, after the French had quitted Brieg, they again

attempted to penetrate from Italy by the Simplon
;

when the Brieg, Kelor , and other villagers, joined

by only one company of Austrians, surrounded them
in the night, and took them prisoners. In Schwytz 

and Unterwalden the division was more strongly

marked. In Unterwalden (where was the scene) the

men  divided and fought against each other, some
joining the French from Stanz to Engelberg.

They were for freedom, and fought as the cause

deserved. They killed 5000 French, more than double

their own number ; women fought ; they were in

all 2100 Swiss. One maid in the ranks, when her

comrades were obliged to retreat, seeing a cannon

yet unfired, went with a rope-end and fired it, killing



i63, THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

thirty  French. She was taken ; a pardon was

offered. She said, " I do not acknowledge any

pardon; my action is not pardonable; a thief 

pardons, not a just man." They killed her with

swords. The hundred men who came from the

higher part of Schwytz, attempting to go to their

relief, were through their own countrymen forced to

cut their way and march by night ; and, when in

retreating they came to the other shore of Lucerne

Lake, they had again to cut through their own
countrymen to arrive at their homes, they refusing

them permission to pass. The Austrians, for the help

the higher Valaisians gave them, from sovereigns

have made them subjects to the lower Valaisians..

The curate came in again, with a description of the

Simplon ; sat an hour and a half, then left the book.

When  not here I have written the part of

my Journal I missed at the time, and the extract

from his book. He came in again about 6 with a

basket of prunes for me, and offered to go with me
half-way, as he had to go to a church on the way.

September 26.—Got up at 5. The curate came,

and, my foot being better, I set off. He showed me
the bridge over the Massa where was a battle, and
the ruins of a tyrant's tower. We came to his church,

where he showed me the miraculous figure that was
found in the Rhone. He told me the lower Valaisians



MOUNT ST. BERNARD 163

were ready to join the French in '13, and that, in

spite of this, they  had given them a

majority of voices. Left me in sight of Brieg, telling

me he hoped to see me again in heaven. I walked

on to Brieg ; breakfasted, and then set off along the

Simplon, a magnificent road indeed. It is cut in

many places through the rocks, in others built up

to its side. It has caverns and bridges always wide

enough for four carriages ; it ascends all the way to

the new Hospice, and again descends from it. At its

side are houses of refuge (as they are called) where

many are kept by government, with privilege of

selling food to help the passers-by. There is in each

a room with a bed where one can go in case of rain,

accident, etc. ; and, when the time for avalanches etc.,

these men are obliged to accompany the travellers

from house to house. Just where the rising ends the

new Hospital was to have been erected, and is half

done, but stopped now. A little farther on is the old

one ; whither I went, and got a dinner in the cell of

one of the monks ; bread, wine, cold meat, and nuts.

He seemed very ennuye; his words slowly fell ; said

they were St. Augustines, not St. Bernardites. That

St. Bernard was a mere reformer of the order. They

have been here since 18 10 only, in an old castle for

which they pay ;^20 a year. The Simplon was a

department of France, and rather well off on account



i64 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

of the quantity of work and money, and not having the

droits revenues. The Archduke Regnier was there a

few days ago incog., and they did not recognize him

—which mortified them very much. It is six leagues

hither from Brieg, so that I had walked twenty-six

miles.

I set off at 2 : passed through Sempeln , and

through the most magnificent scenery, through the

granite galleries. The Italian part is by far the

most difficult and splendid. The first boy that I

met before coming to Isella, in answer to a question

in German, answered " Non capisco " ^
; I could have

hugged. I arrived after much difficulty at Isella,

knocked up. I was ruined in my feet, and it was not

till near here that the carriages which parted in the

morning from Brieg overtook me. Went to bed

immediately in a room where the grease might be

scraped from the floor.

September 27.—Did not get up till i on account

of fatigue. Breakfasted most miserably, everything

being bad ; and then set off, but immensely slowly

till a cart overtook me. Entered ; lay upon the logs

of wood and hay, and was driven to Domo d'Ossola.

Is it imagination only that I find the sky finer,

the country where cultivated extremely rich, green-

looking? The dress of the women picturesque, blue

^ " I don't understand."



ORNAVASCO 165

with red stripes here and there ; the men more acute

and quicker-eyed. Arrived at Domo d'Ossola at 3 ;

got into a clean though poor inn, and dined well.

A gendarme came in to ask how it was that my
passport had not been visdd yet ; and then, seeing I

was a physician, requested a cure for his toothache.

It is useless to describe the picturesque : the best

page to turn to for it is the memory. After one of

the most comfortable fireside-evenings I have had
since I left Geneva I went to bed at 7|.

September 28.—Set off at 6 o'clock through vine-

country, with little hills here and there starting out

of the low Alps, highly cultivated, with beautiful

little white villas at their tops and sides. Asked a

woman what was a house whereon was painted

a Democritus, Diogenes, etc. Answered, "E roba

antica " ^—though evidently modern, but deserted.

Indeed, the whole of the houses seem too large for

the inhabitants—much falling to ruin. From Domo
d'Ossola went to Vella ; to Vagagna, where I break-

fasted and saw the first good-looking Italian girl.

The children are pretty, the women quite otherwise.

There began to suffer from my feet so much as that

to go about six more miles took me five hours. No
car passed me, or anything.

I arrived at last at Ornavasco. Could get no car,

1 " It's an old affair,"



:

i66 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

though they kept me half-an-hour in the yard

standing, in hopes of getting one. At last agreed

with a man that he should set off at 4 o'clock

to-morrow to Fariolo for 4 francs. Looked at a

bedroom : shrugged up my shoulders, but forced.

Dinner : no meat, because " meagre." Ate the fruit.

The Italian grapes, nectarines, peaches, and pears, I

got yesterday, excellent. Two bunches of grapes

half-a-franc : two at dinner.

Sunday, September 29.—Up at 5. Got into the

char, or rather cart. Passed through Gravellino to

Fariolo. Asked 10 francs to take me to Laveno
offered 4—accepted. Got into the boat. Rowed
towards Isola Madre passed Isola Pescatori ; and

;

landed on Isola Bella.

Went over the palace. Many of the floors miserable

on account of their being the mere rock. Some good
pictures. A whole set of rooms below in the style

of grottoes, with windows looking on to beautiful

views, close to the lake for il fresco. Looked at the

terrace : not pleasing the style : and, thinking I

should see it all in going round, did not go over

the gardens. Went round the island in the boat
;

magnificently paved, like terrace on terrace.

Thence towards Laveno, intending to go to Lugano
and Como ; but, hearing that I could go all the way
by water to Milan, I preferred this, and accordingly



MILAN 167

turned round towards Belgirato. Breakfasted on

caffe al latte, uve, and fichi} 4J francs. Boatman
proposed my joining a party to Sestri-Calende, which

I did. Arona, with the colossus, on my left, Anghera
on my right ; Monte Rosa ; all the bottom part of

the lake richly magnificent.



The boatman came as I had desired, to guide

me. Entered Milan by a fine gate with a kind of

triumphal arch. The streets are clean but narrow

fine houses. There are two strips of pavement for

wheels, and often two for pedestrians. Passed by

Santa Maria—fine, all white marble, with many fine

statues on the outside. Many palaces. A bad taste

shown in plastering the columns and corner-stones

of a lighter colour than the body.

Got a letter from Brelaz ; well written in composition

and in letters, but badly spelled. Got my trunk, after

some difficulty, passed. The diligence-keepers asked

if they could direct me to rooms : showed two where

a man was at that moment going. Got them for 40
lire il mese ; a bedroom and sitting-room, second

storey, Contrado San Spirito. Sent to the custom-

house. Made the men wait—sent them away for two
hours, again away for one. More stoppages, and, in

centimes, 3 francs to pay. They would not at first let

it (the trunk) go because it was the last day of the

month.



Went to dine at a restaurateur's : ij-franc dinner.



:

MILAN 169

Afterwards put my things into a little order, dressed,

and went strolling towards Teatro della Scala.

Entered, two hours before beginning, alone. Im-
mense theatre : six rows of boxes, with, I think,

thirty-six in a row. La Testa di Bronzo, a ballet,

and a comic ballet : the ballet the most magnificent

thing I ever saw—splendid indeed.

October 2.—Got up at 8. Breakfasted on grapes,

bread and butter, wine, and figs. Wrote to Lord
Byron. Dressed, Went to Marchese Lapone—out

of town ; Monsignor Brema—not at home. Walked
about looking at booksellers' shops. Entered the

Duomo—invisible almost, so black and dark. They
were putting up drapery for Friday, which is the

Emperor's birthday (probably the same as for

Napoleon). Returned home, arranged my papers.

Took a walk on the Corso ; then to the Teatro Re.

The same price for all the places. The piece //

Sogno di Ariosto , where Fortune,

Merit, Orgoglio, with Mrs. Disinganno,^ were all

personified. The dialogue abounded in truths, es-

pecially regarding women, which they applauded.

The theatre is very small, like the Haymarket.

Home to bed.

October 3.—Up at 8. Went to a circulating library

read Denina, Vicende, all the part on Italy and

1 Orgoglio is pride ; disinganno is undeceiving, disillusion.



I70 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

preface. To the Teatro Scelto di Milano. Enquired

about Andricini etc. for my father—not found.



Went to the Teatro Re ; ^ a play of English people

in which they kiss the hand, and make more bows

than were ever made in a century in England. There

were German soldiers in English uniforms present.

Home, to bed.

October 4.—Up at 8—breakfasted. Went to call

on Monsignore Br6me—found him. Received me
with two kisses and great apparent joy. About to

learn English : I promised my help. Walked with

me, and invited me to his box.



Left him—came home. Read Denina's Ultime

Vicende, a poor book. Went to Guyler. Met Cara-

vella—walked with him. Went to dine : where I met
his brother, who told me the physician at Florence

was dead, and promised to come and take me to the

hospital. Met after dinner Abate Berlezi the Crabule.'^

Came home. Read the Calandra of Bibiena, and

Sofonisba of Trissino. Took an ice, and went to

La Scala. Feast of St. Francis, the Emperor's. When
the Dukes went this morning to mass at the Duomo
not a hat moved, not a voice of applause : however,

when Regnier entered, there was a slight clapping

of hands. The theatre was lighted up like an English

one, and was magnificent, but showed what the Italians

allege—that the scene does not improve by it, but the

contrary.

In Brema's loge there were Monti, Brema's brother,

and others. Monti a short man, round face, quick

eye pleasant in conversation, not haughty, modest,
;

unassuming; seemed to take great pleasure in parts

of the music and in the dancing.



Brema related that a friend of his, Porro, asked for

a passport to Rome : refused, and asked for docu-

ments to prove his business. Gave what proved he
had business at Maurata and relatives at Rome.
Refused. Went to Swarrow, who told him he could

not give it. Porro said "
: Why do the Austrians

think the Italians are always making conspiracies?"

Swarrow said that they did not know, but, now that

they had the upper hand, they cared not ; and at last

that, if Porro would give his word of honour not to

visit any of the foreign embassies, he should have



MILAN 173

a passport. He had it. Porro was not a revolutionist

but had always been against Napoleon, and had
belonged to a legislative body by him dissolved on

account of obstinacy. Brema and others accompanied

me as far as the door, and I went to bed.



From that day I neglected my Journal till this day,

December 8.—My residence at Milan lasted till

October 30. During that time I had a most happy
and pleasant life, Monsignor de Br^me taking great

friendship for me. My friends and acquaintance

were Breme, Borsieri, Guasco, Cavalier Br^me, Beyle,

Negri, Byron, Hobhouse, Finch, Caravellas, Locatelli,

Monti, Monti's son-in-law, Lord Cowper, Lord Jersey,

etc. ; Lloyd, Lee, Wotheron.



De Breme and I became very intimate, and I believe

he is really a good friend. In the morning at 10

o'clock I went to him to help him in English, and
towards the end he corrected my Italian translation

of Count Orlando} We afterwards met at his box
every night in the theatre of La Scala. He gave a

dinner to Lord Byron, at which were a good many
or rather all my acquaintances—Monti, Finch, Hob-
house, two Brdmes, Borsieri, Guasco (translator of

Sophocles), Negri (author of Francesca of Rimini, a

play). The dinner was very elegant, and we were
very merry, talking chiefly of literature, Castlereagh,

Burghersh, etc. We got up immediately after dinner,

and went to coffee ; thence most to the theatre. De
' Presumably some English book, but I know not what.



MILAN 175

Breme was Vicar Almoner under the French Govern-

ment. A priest came to him to ask leave to confess
;

Br^me, knowing the subject, refused. The Princess

was put to move Beauharnais, who sent for BrSme
and in a very angry mood asked him why he had
refused leave. B said that, as he was placed

to give leave, he imagined it was that it might not be

granted indiscriminately, that he could not in his

conscience give it, but that he was not the chief,

and the Almoner, being applied to, might grant it.

B asked why, saying that the Princess

wished it, and it must be done. De B said he
had undertaken the office under the idea that his

conscience was to be his guide ; if not, the office

should be immediately vacant ; that he put it to

Beauharnais himself whether a man who was buried

in the vilest dissoluteness was a proper person to be

entrusted with the care of young women's minds.,

Beauharnais said, " Right, right you shall hear no
;

more of it." This, and another occasion of the same
nature, were the only occasions in which he saw

Beauharnais privately ; he avoided the court, and did

not seek preferment. He twice under that govern-

ment refused a bishopric, and under the new govern-

ment giving
; me as a reason that it went against,

his conscience to inculcate what he did not believe,,

and to add power to those who gave them, as he



;;

176 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

would be expected to side with them. He is

violently for the independence of Italy. Christianity

he believes not, and gives (I think) a new argument

why we should not be holden to believe it. Saul, who

was contemporary, who beheld the miracles etc., did

not believe till a miracle was operated upon him

we at this distance cannot believe with greater facility.

He has published an eulogium of Caluro, Ingiustizia

del Giudizio, etc., poems, etc. Has written several

tragedies ; Ina made me weep like a child. He is

warm in his affections, and has never recovered the

death of one he loved—a young noble lady, of great

accomplishments and beauty. His friendship for me
was warm : it gratifies me more than any attentions,

friendship, or any relation I had before, with my
fellow-companions. I cannot express what I feel for

him. When parting from him, I wept like a child

in his arms. He maintains from principle, not from

belief, all the hardships imposed upon him by his

tonsure. He would have the world to see that his

belief is not swayed by a wish to escape from the

bonds of the clerical state. He is charitable, giving

away great sums of money in charity ; eats only once

a day, and studies all day till the hour of the theatre

kind to all who are recommended to him ; sacrificing

whole days to show them what he has seen a

thousand times ; a great admirer of English women
;



MILAN 177

has an excellent library, of which I had the use. A
great friend of comic, good-natured mimicry. Has
an idea of writing Ida, a novel containing a picture

of the most promising movements of the Milan

revolution, and I have promised to translate it. He
has two brothers ; his father lives yet ; his eldest

brother is Ambassador at Munich. The youngest

is Cavalier Br^me—been officer in Spain ; extremely

pleasant and affectionate with me. Breme was a

great friend of Caluro's, and to him Caluro dedicated

one of his opuscules.

Borsieri, a man of great mental digestive power

and memory, superficially read ; author of // Giomo,

a work written with great grace and lightness. He
was very intimate with me, Guasco, and Br^me.

Guasco, a Piedmontese ; little reading, but great

mental vision and talents. He also was one who
attached himself a good deal to me. De Beyle,

formerly Intendant des Marches (I think) to Buona-

parte, and his secretary when in the country. A fat

lascivious man. A great deal of anecdote about

Buonaparte : calls him an inimitable et bon despote.

He related many anecdotes—I don't remember

them: amongst other things, he said Buonaparte

despised the Italians much.





178 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

These four were the usual attendants at De
Breme's box.

Monti is a short, roundish, quick-eyed, and rather

rascally-faced man, affable, easily fired ; talks rather

nonsense when off poetry, and even upon that not

good. Great imagination ; very weak. Republican

always in conversation with us ; but in the first

month, after having declaimed strongly in Bs

box about liberty and Germans, just as they were

going out he said, " But now let us talk no more of

this, on account of my pension." Under the French

government he gained a great deal by his various

offices ; by this one he has been abridged of half.

He translated the Iliad of Homer without knowing

a word of Greek ; he had it translated by his friends,

word for word written under the Greek. Easily

influenced by the opinions of others ; in fact, a com-

plete weathercock. He married the daughter of

Pickler, the engraver; a fine woman, and they say

an exceedingly good reciter, as he is himself She

has acted in his plays upon the Philodramatic stage.

His daughter is married.

Negri—Marchese Negri ^—a Genoese, not an im-

provisatore—very chatty ; has at Genoa a most

1 I think the name would correctly be Marchese di Negro :

my father had some correspondence, towards 1850, with the then

Marchese of that family.



—

MILAN 179

beautiful garden which all the English visit. Related

to me Gianni's beginning. Gianni was an apprentice

to a stay-maker, when one day an Abate, going

into the shop, found him busily engaged in reading.

Looking at the book, he asked him if he understood

it. He said yes, and, on reading, showed it by his

expression. The Abate, who was an improvisatore,

asked him to see him next morning ; when he

improvised before him, and observed that the young

Gianni seemed as if his mind was full and wished

to give forth. He had him sent to school, and intro-

duced him. Gianni in the Revolution, taking the

Liberal side, was obliged to leave Rome, and, going

to Genoa, Negri heard by letter of it, and went to

seek him, inviting him to dine with him. He refused;

and Negri, who had promised his friends that he

would be of the party, at the hour of dinner went

and found him with his nightcap on, deeply reading

his favourite Dante ; and in a manner dragged him

by force to his house, where Gianni pleased much
and stayed a year at Negri's house, teaching him the

art of improvisation. Gianni's improvisations were

(many) improvised on the spot by an Abate into

Latin verse.—Negri came to Brume's box several

times, and had the effect of making all except

Breme burst with laughter : me he sent to sleep.

Lord Byron came to Milan, and I saw him there



1

lao THE DL\RV OF POUDORl

ibe Er^c-isi --" bik" essay in Th^ PiamfUiiiiV'} He
Ti£t2d a g^roi i«i- B~nci "rex. Mr, Hrci^ccse

mas Tsiii him.

—^— ^" '.~ "g-- " ^.no mas ^'^-^•" uri,. rsi— — . Tt ":»-:

xhi: GiZec 5 MSS. «ers iz ilsruts, ic :±^: the

bcirs win r,;: part isrlrh ±^ec:i : ri^y crr.nia 5C~s

re-ar ir.i seme vxrircs reiiii-CS- F;r.ri i? a grr?.;.:

miten he irrl\-aj a: a rem or odier p^ice. to set

about skercilrug^ and tl;- ccircrl-g. so tlat r.e hxs

peiha^ rie mrsr cr~rlere ccCLecric" oi sketches

• Tziis essT '-ii oe ie ?-crsi=ffir.: of DeklJk.



MILAN i8i

of his tour possible. He invited me (taking me
for an Italian), in case I went to England, to see

him ; and, hearing I was English, he pressed me
much more.—Locatelli was the physician of the

hospital, a good unimpostoring physician. I saw
under him a case of pemphizus, and had under my
care an hysterical woman.

Jersey, Lady, promised to enquire of her mother.

Lady Westmorland, if she would employ me as

her physician ; but said she thought my having been

with Lord B a great objection.



Lloyd ;—as I was moving in the pit, found him, and

never saw a person so glad in my life. He offered

me half of the money he had at his banker's, as he

thought I must be much embarrassed. Told me



—

i82 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

Brelaz and Bertolini seemed to be together, and that

the man seemed worked off his legs.

My life at Milan was very methodical. I got up,

went to the hospital, breakfasted, came home, studied,

dined, and then at 7 went to the theatre. Between

breakfast and study went to de Br^me to help him

in English. It was proposed too, by him, to teach

English, which I had intended to do.

I saw only the dome under which is the chapel of

St. Borromeo—very rich in silver, crystal, and jewels.

The body is vested in pontificals, and quite dry. The
orbits seem only filled with a little heap of black

dirt, and the skull etc. is black. There is here the

gnometer of Cassini. They preserve here a nail of

the cross of Christ.—St. Ambrose, the ancient Cathe-

dral. It was at the gates of this that Theodosius was

refused entrance.—The Brera library; and the Am-
brosian, where I saw the Virgil with marginal notes

of Petrarch ; some of the pieces of MSS. of the

Plautus and Terence, fragments edited by Mai.

Some of the paintings there are beautiful. The
Milanese Raphael has some heads expressing such

mild heavenly meekness as is scarcely imagined.



When at Milan, I spent almost all my money in

books, buying nearly 3CXD volumes, not being able to

resist that thirst for printed sheets, many of which I

never shall read.

Swarrow, the Governor of Milan, when the

Emperor was there, accompanying him to the theatre,

saw that one poor man in the pit, leaning against a

box, had dared to keep his hat on. Violently

enraged, he enters the box, without leave or saying

a word ; and, leaning over the box with all his orders

dangling at his breast, applies two hearty slaps to the

poor man's cheeks, and then, rising majestically,

leaves the box, and goes to receive the despot's

smile. This making a great hubbub, and exciting a

great deal of ridicule against the noble police-officer,

he insisted with the police-director that not a word

more should be allowed to be said.

When at Milan, there came Sgricci, a Tuscan,

under the patronage of Monti, who puffed him most

egregiously, especially his tragic improvisati. I

accompanied de Br^me to Casa Crivelli, where I saw

Swarrow and a cardinal ; a dried- up ganache 

Going one evening with L B and Mr.

H to B's box, Mr. Hobhouse, Bor-

sieri, and myself, went into the pit, standing to look

at the ballet. An officer in a great-coat came and

placed himself completely before me with his grena-

dier's hat on. I remarked it to my companions
" Guarda a colui colla sua berretta in testa " (I believe

those were my words), waiting a few minutes to see if

he would move. I touched him, and said, " Vorrebbe
"

farmi la grazia di levarsi il cappello purch'io vegga ?

He turning said " Lo vorreste .' " with a smile of

insult. I answered : "SI, lo voglio."^ He then asked

1 The speeches run thus : (a) Look at that man, with his cap
on his head, (b) Would you do me the favour of taking off

your hat, so that I may see? (c) Would you wish for it?

{d) Yes, I wish it. In Italian, this last phrase has an imperative
tone, " I will it."—It may be added that the Austrian's phrase
" Lo vorreste?" was itself not civil : the civil form would have
been " Lo vorrebbe ella ? ''



MILAN 187

me if I would go out with him. I, thinking he meant
for a duel, said, " Yes, with pleasure "

; and called Mr.

Hobhouse to accompany me. He did. When pass-

ing by the guard-house he said, " Go in, go in there "
;

I said I would not, that it was not there I thought of

going with him. Then he swore in German, and drew

half his sabre with a threatening look, but Hobhouse
held his hand. The police on guard came, and he

delivered me to their custody. I entered the guard-

house, and he began declaiming about the insult to

one like him. I said I was his equal, and, being in

the theatre, to any one there. " Equal to me ? " he

retorted ; "you are not equal to the last of the

Austrian soldiers in the house " ; and then began

abusing me in all the Billingsgate German he was

master of—which I did not know till afterwards. In

the meanwhile the news had spread in the theatre, and

reached de Br^me and L Byron, who came run-

ning down, and tried to get me away, but could not on

any plea. De Breme heard the secretary of police

say to the officer "
: Don't you meddle with this, leave

it to me." De Br^me said he would go to Bubna
immediately, and get an order for my dismission ; on

which the officer took Lord Byron's card, as bail that

I would appear to answer for my conduct on the

morrow. Then I was released.

Next morning I received a printed order from

the police to attend. As soon as I saw the order



i88 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

I went to De Breme, who accompanied me to the

gate. I entered. " Where do you wish your pass-

port vis^d for?" "I am not thinking of going."

"You must be off in four-and-twenty hours for

Florence." " But I wish for more time." " You
must be off in that time, or you will have some-

thing disagreeable happen to you." Breme, upon

hearing this, immediately set off to Bubna, and I

to Lord Byron, who sent Mr. Hobhouse in company
of Colonel McSomething to Swarrow to ask that I

might not be obliged to go. They went. Swarrow

received them with a pen in his hand ; said it was

a bagatelle; that the Secretary of Police had been

there in the morning, and that he had told him of it.

That it was nothing, that I should find myself as well

off in any other city as there, and that, if I stayed,

something worse might happen. Hobhouse tried to

speak. S advanced a foot "
; Give my

compliments to Lord Byron ; am sorry I was not at

home when he called." " But if this is so mere a

trifle ."—
. . "I hope Lord Byron is well"; advanc-

ing another foot, and then little by little got them
so near the door that they saw it was useless, and

left him. De Breme in the meanwhile had been

to Bubna. Bubna received him very politely, and

said he had already seen Colonel M., who had ex-

plained to him the whole ; and that for the mistake

of speaking to the officer on guard he thought it



MILAN 189

enough that I had been put under arrest. " I

am much obliged to you, and am glad then that

my friend will not have to leave Milan.'' " What do

you mean ? " Breme explained. " It is impossible,

there must be some mistake, for I have had no

memorial of it. I will see Swarrow this evening

about it." De Br^me mentioned with what idea 1 had

left the theatre. Bubna said that German soldiers

had one prejudice less; and at the theatre in the

evening I heard many instances of the officers of

the Austrian Army acting meanly in this respect.

Amongst others, Bubna's son, being challenged for

insulting a lady at a public ball, accepted the

challenge, but said there were several things he had

to settle first, and that he would appoint a day for the

following week. He left Milan the Saturday before.

A young Italian had a dispute with a Hussar officer,

and challenged him, for which he was brought before

the police and reprimanded. Some days after, the

officer, standing at a coffee-room door, asked him if

he wished to settle the affair with him. He said yes,

and they immediately entered. The officer spoke to

several of his companions in the room, and they all

struck the young man, and pushed him out. He
could get no redress.



October 30.—Got up early next morning, packed up

my books and things ; then went to seek for a coach

that was parting for Lodi. Found one, and fixed that



LODI 193

a vetturino, who was going to set off next day for

Florence, should take me up at Lodi. Went to see

de BrSme. He told me he had been to Bubna's, but

that he had found him out at a council of war, and
that he had left an order none should follow him. I

took leave of de Breme, and wept in his arms like a

child, for his kindness and friendship had been dear

to me. I took leave of L B, H,

and Guasco. The last offered me his services in any
way, and said he should take it as a favour the oftener

he was applied to. I got into the coach with only

5 louis in my pocket, leaving my books in the care

of de Breme, and left Milan with rage and grief so

struggling in my breast that tears often started in my
eyes, and all I could think of was revenge against

Swarrow and the officer in particular, and a hope that

before I left Italy there might be a rising to which I

might join myself. I arrived at Lodi ; wrote to Lloyd

to ask him to lend me some money, and went to bed

exhausted.

October 31.—Up at 9: breakfasted. Went to see

the Duomo and other churches without feeling inter-

est ; the hospital, which is a magnificent building.

Returning to the inn, I met the vetturino. I found

in the coach a Prussian student of Heidelberg who
had made the campaigns of '13 and '14 with the

rest of his companions, and who was banished

13



;

194 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

Heidelberg for slapping a Russian in the face.

Growled against his king for not keeping his promise

hated the French, and gave me an interesting account

of the way of spending the winter evenings in his part

of Germany, Pomerania ; the young working at some

pursuit of hand, the old relating their tale of youth.

A Milanese woman and son. We went that evening

to Casal Panterlungo. Supped and went to bed, I

and the Prussian in the same room.

November 2.—Up at 4. Across the Taro to Parma.

Went, in spite of my having so little money, in search

of books—Boccaccio's Fiammetta. The Cathedral

and Baptistery. From Parma to Reggio, a beautiful

town with fine palaces and porticoes, though, on

account of the few inhabitants, appearing a huge

sepulchre. To Rubiera : supped and slept.

November 3.—Up at 4. Through Modena, where

I saw the Duomo, and the Tower which contains the

Lecchia porticoes—palaces of the Duke—four orders

heaped one on the other. Here they examined my
box, and were going to send it to the dogana on

account of books; when, upon my saying I was a

physician, they let them pass.

At Bologna supped with the Prussian. To the

opera. Saw a ballet, extremely ridiculous : barbarian

dances with astonishing powers of limbs forming in

the air  out and in on their feet.



BOLOGNA 19s

November 4.—Up at 9. Went to see the churches

and  private gallery. After dinner roamed about

the town in a most melancholy mood, entering the

churches and sitting in the dark for an hour, etc.

Went to the Theatre of Cento Cavalli : beautiful

Greek architecture. To bed—a play.

November 5.—At 10, expecting to have been called

before, the vetturino came, saying he would not go,

since I had hindered the Prussian from setting off on

Monday, without security ; and that he would go to

the police to gain it from the Prussian that he should

be paid at Florence. After a good deal of disputing

I gave it, in a promissory note that I would pay if

he could not. Found afterwards it was only to get

time.

Went to see the churches, the public place, San

Prospero, the Neptune. After dinner to Madonna

Santa Lucia. Along the portico " Questo e da

vendere " ^ was written on portions of the wall. The

public cemetery. Saw a coffin, when dark, brought

into the church with torches. The poor are separated

from the rich, and have only the turf upon them : the

rich groan under the weight of marble. The priests,

monks, nuns, etc., all in separate squares ; a cardinal's

hat covering a death's head.

Returned to Bologna. Went to the theatre. Saw
1 "To be sold."



—

196 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

Agnese : wept like a child : the acting of the madman
inimitable. Went to bed.

November 6.—Up at 1 1. Set ofif with the Prussian

and an Italian officer across the Apennines. Oxen in

continual use. Misty, so could not enjoy the view.

Dreadful winds to Pianoro. That evening the officer

related all the services he had been in ; French

liberty, Consulship, Emperor. Refused by the

Austrians ; went to Murat, and now going to offer

himself to the Pope ; if not accepted, to America.

For which side ? " Spanish or Creole." ^ He had the

unfeelingness to joke upon his father's being killed in

the time of the liberty-rows, saying he got that for not

changing ; on which I felt so nettled that I spoke for

half-an-hour upon the ruin the fickleness of the

Italians had brought upon themselves. He felt, I

think, ashamed ; at least he gave up that kind of light

talk.

Forgot to say that at Modena I presented^ my
passport so that the " 24 hours " were invisible ; and

left at Modena one who had accompanied us from

Piacenza, teUing the most barefaced lies about boars,

dogs, and thieves, that were ever heard.

^ These words form (I suppose) the answer of the Italian

officer i. e. he would side with either party indifferently.
'^ I presume that the word should be " presented " : the

writing looks like "pented."



FLORENCE 197

November 7.—At 4 up. Arrived at night at

Fortebuona. Dreadful wind and rain. Supped and

went to bed.

November 8.—At 5 walked a good part of the

road. Arrived at Florence by the Porta San Gallo,

through the Arch. The custom-house officer, when
we told him, if he wanted to look, he might open,

 "
: Che ? Un servo del sovrano ? Ci sono dei

facchini." ^

Florence, on entering, disappointed me, as we were

obliged to go round on account of the road being

mended. Went to the inn. Dressed—not having

changed linen since Milan. Went to the post : no
letters. In despair, remaining with only four scudi.

Walked about the town,—Arno : into the Cathedral

and Baptistery.

Went to seek Cavalier Pontelli.^ Knocked at his

door, along Arno—both before and behind. Could

not make any one hear. One who lived near

(Lecchini), upon my asking how to get in, said he was

thankful to say he was not Pontelli, and did not know.

Returned home. Gave the Prussian a missal I had

' " What ? A servant of the sovereign ? There are porters."
^ I suppose that Pontelli was a person who had been more or

less known to Dr. Polidori's father before the latter left Italy in

1787, and that the father had given his son some letter of intro-

duction or the like. Or possibly the introduction came from

some acquaintance in Geneva or in Milan,



igS THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

bought at Bologna. He broke my pipe. Went to

bed. Wrote to Pontelli and Breme.

November g.—Got up ; went to seek Pontelli.

Found he had a villa at Porta San Gallo. Went
thither, knocked ; saw his head pop out of the window
in a greasy night-cap. On my announcing myself,

he descended, opened the door, and received me
with welcome. Found him at breakfast, sausages,

caviare, etc. Sat down ; told me his housekeeper would

not show herself; invited me to come to his house

instead of the inn. Went into town ; took a peep at

the Gallery—at the precious vases, Venus, etc. Went
to the inn. Put up my things, paid ; and, seeing

the Prussian envied me my desk, I gave it him, on

condition that, if we ever met again, he would paint

me a picture he sketched in my album. Went to

Pontelli ; dined; accompanied him to town. His

servant took a porter to carry my things to the Arno
house, and then we went to pay visits.

In the way he told me he lived very retired, and
very economically that he might not want ; that the

people now looked upon him with a good eye ; that

the Government also did not prosecute him ; and that

he in fine thought that a revolution would be general

—trying to persuade me that his avarice was mere
policy.

Went to pay a visit to Cavalier Tomasi, a Cortonian,



FLORENCE 199

Found many in the room, who all sat upon me about

English politics. Left them when they were going

to play. Thence to Abate Fontani, Librarian of the

Riccardi Library. Talked of Madame de Stael,

Finch, etc.

Returned home. Found I was in the house of the

Capponis, Pontelli having the lower storey.

November 10.—Up at 9. Dressed in black silk etc.,

the housekeeper going to mass ; and, Pontelli appar-

ently not being willing that I should accompany her,

I went out a little after, and went to the same church,

where I spoke with her. Looked at the church ; and

then went to San Lorenzo, Santo Spirito ,^ where I saw the tomb of Galileo, Machiavelli,

Alfieri, Cosmo de' Medici, etc.

Returned, and went with a letter from de Br^me
to the Countess of Albany. Found there several.

Presented my letter "
: Very like your father."



Conversation became general. Republics being

brought upon the tapis, I took to defending them,

especially against a gentleman near me. After some
time he went, and I gathered he was brother to the

King of Prussia.

Took my leave, and came to dinner, after going to

the caffe to wait for Pontelli. Rain hindered him

from keeping his appointment, so that I went at last

alone to San Gallo, he having the custom of staying

the Sundays only in town. Was presented by him

to Lecchini, the Inspector of Police, who recognized

me as a Tuscan, and the domiciliary communication

was made out as such.

November 11.—Tried to stay at home. Forced by

Pontelli's long-in-vain repeated hints to go out

jealous of his young housekeeper, though she is

hardly worth it. Roamed about, dined, and went

to bed.

November, 12.—Same. Dined with him at a

restaurateur's.

November 1 3.—Got up at 7 ; tired of Pontelli, and

set off for Arezzo, with a shirt in my pocket and



203 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

with my dog. When at Incisa it began to rain
;

walked on through Feline, Monte Varchi, to Arezzo.

Thunder and lightning excessive, with violent rain.

I was at last so numbed that when roused I seemed

to be wakened ; my dog could not stand it, but at

7 miles from Arezzo fell. I did not perceive it, but

walked on. Arrived at 8, having walked 45 miles

in 12 hours, having stopped once at Incisa to eat

and rest. Found my uncle's house ; knocked. The
servant, hearing I was his nephew, flew up-stairs, and
I met a tall, stout, slovenly woman, my aunt. On
the second storey, where they lodged, they made a

fire. I changed my things for my uncle's, and while

changing he arrived—a tall, stout, handsome, mild-

looking man. Put myself to bed ; ate, and they left

me to sleep.



November 14.—Found myself well ; no cold, only

my left groin stiff from a wound in my foot. Saw
my two cousins, Pippo and Teresa put myself to

;

study. After 6 went with my uncle to Signor Gori,

where I heard music. Four or five girls wanting
husbands, two priests, whitewashed walls, and several

young men, were the entertainment.

While at Arezzo, my life was quiet enough ; study



FLORENCE 203

till I went out at 6, when I went to play at cards and

talk at Signor Gori's. Saw the prisons. One of the

descendants of a true Lombard family walking about

in a dirty sailor-looking jacket. Signora Onesti and

daughter the most abominable scandal-talkers I ever

heard, though she was a Pitti. Library always shut.

The School of Ignatius a fine building. Churches

fine : the Chapel of St. Mary, the Cathedral with the

basso-rilievo altars, the church with the altar painted

by Vasari, etc.—I recovered my dog.

November 21.—Set off to return to Florence with

half-a-scudo in my pocket ; having refused to accept

from my uncle, not being willing to let him know
how it stood. Frost /on the ground : hurt my foot.

Lost my dog again at Montesarchi. At Feline got

into a carriage, not being able to do more on account

of my foot. Met a physician, a cavaliere and his

wife. Arrived at 7 ; Pontelli lent me a scudo to pay.

November 22, 23, 24.—Stayed at Pontelli's on account

of my foot, though Pontelli tried to send me out

under pretence that I should see the town. But, not

being able, he stayed at home till 6, when he told me

I had better go to bed—which I generally did to quiet

him. No letters according to servant.

November 25.—Tired of Pontelli. That I might go

to Pisa, I issued out intending to sell my watch-chain ;

but as a last chance looked at the Post Office, and



—

204 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

found two letters from Lloyd, who, as soon as he had

received my letter, set off from Venice to see me.

On the road he lost his purse with 36 louis, and,

having no letters at Florence, he could only give me
20 scudi. Received me with great kindness, and

assured me that, while he had money, I should never

want. Dined with him and Somers. They advised

me to settle in Florence as physician to the English.

I however determined to see Vacca first ; wished him

good-bye, as he was obliged to go to Rome for money.



December 2.—Up at 9 ; went to see Vacc^ ; still at

hospital. While waiting for him, saw an Austrian

colonel, who, in the excess of his gratitude to Vaccal,

called him the Dio della Medicina. Vacca expressed

great joy to see me ; told me to make his house my



2o6 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

own ; to dine there when I chose, and often ; to

begin to-day ; not to use ceremony. Left me, and I

returned home; went to dine at V's. Intro-

duced me to his wife, a pleasing pretty French-

woman, the former wife of his brother ; he had just

obtained the Pope's dispensation to marry her. Spent

the evening there.

December 3, 4, to 21.—Went to the hospital in the

mornings when Vacca was not ill; three or four

times to the Library. Studied in the mornings ; went

to dine either at Vacca's or at eating-house ; always

evenings at Vacca's. Corsi, a well-informed lawyer,

cav serv to V ; Mario ex cav

serv. Cecco Castanelli, Pachiani, etc. ; chess

with the English ; with Vacc^. For the various

information I obtained there see notes.

 by an irresistible bon mot. During one

of his midnight orgies, which he was in the habit of

celebrating with some of the most dissolute of the

students, he was interrogated, in the darkness, by the

patrole in the streets of Pisa as to who and what he

was,—to which questioning he gave the following

reply '
: Son un uomo pubblico, in una strada pubblica,

con una donna pubblica.' His epigrams vfer&sanglants,

and he gave sobriquets the most happy for those

who offended him. His talent was conversation—
conversation full of repartee and sparkling with wit

and his information (he was a man of profound

erudition, vast memory, and first-rate talent) made
him almost oracular. He was a mezzano, cicerone,

conoscitore, dilettante, and I might add ruffiano."^]

December 21.—Went in the evening to the Countess

Mastrani's. Ices, iced people, prepared poetry, music.

Went to the theatre, in the days past, several times.

Saw Goldoni's Bugiardo, with Harlequin etc.

' Ruffiano does not correspond to our word " ruffian," but to

"pimp" or " go-between.''



2o8 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

December 22.—As usual.

December 23.—Same.

December 24.—Ditto.

December 25.—Christmas-day. Walked along Arno.

Spent the evening and dined at Vacca's.

December 26.—Up at 7. Went with Vacca to

Leghorn, a neat, regular, well-built town. The
first thing I went in search of was the sea, and I

stood gazing some time on the waves. The Public

Place and Strada Maestra fine. Saw Vescali's

collection of alabasters. Returned by 3. Dined

with Vacca. Went to the theatre with Mrs. Vacca,

who introduced me to Signora Bettina Franciuoli.

December 27.—As usual. Up at 4—dined at Vacca's

—went to theatre, and to B.'s box.

December 28.—Went to hear nella Chiesa dei

Cavalieri (after a ride with Mrs. Vacca) Nicolini play

a sonata upon the organ, which is perhaps the finest

in Italy. There were the Prince Villafranca, the

Countess Castelfiel, Princess della Pace, and other

nobles. At Vacca's and theatre.

December 29.—Up at 3|. Dined at Vacca's:

theatre. English etc. as usual.

December 10.—Upat i. Reading Sismondi. Got
up—went to Vacc^ to dine. After English, to the

Casa Mastrani : all evening with Sofia. The others

—Biribro, Dionigi.



—
LETTERS 209



With this entry we come to the end of Dr,

Polidori's Diary—although (as I have before intimated)

not by any means to the end of his sojourn in Italy.

He saw Byron again in April 18 17 in Venice:

Shelley, to the best of my knowledge, he never

re-beheld.

I add here two letters which Polidori wrote to his

sister Frances (my mother, then a girl of only sixteen),

and two to his father. The first letter was written

soon after beginning the journey with Byron ; the

last not long after the date of parting from him. I

also add a letter sent to Mr. Hobhouse during

Polidori's sojourn with Byron, and a note, of much
later date, written by Mrs. Shelley to my father,

Gabriele Rossetti.

The letter to Mr. Hobhouse, it will be observed,

goes over some of the same details which appear in

the Diary. This letter has been copied by me from

the Broughton Papers, in the Manuscript Department

of the British Museum (Add. MSS. 36456 to 36483).

I did my best to trace whether these papers contain

14



2IO THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

anything else relating to Polidori, and I do not think

they do. In fact, the affairs of Lord Byron, and the

very name of him, scarcely figure in those Broughton

Papers at all : for instance, I could not find anything

relating to his death.

John Polidori to Frances Polidori.

My dear Fanny,
I shall see Waterloo in a day or two—don't

you wish to be with me? but there are many more

things that I have seen which would have given you

as much pleasure. Shakespear's Cliff at Dover, the

French coast, the phosphorescent sea, Bruges, Ghent,

Antwerp, and Brussels, have all got more than is in

any of Feinaigh's plates to excite the memory to

bring forth its hidden stores. The people amongst

whom we are at present dwelling is one that has

much distinguished itself in the noblest career, the

race for liberty ; but that tends little to the ennobling

of a people without the sun of literature also deigns

to shine upon them.

It was not the warlike deeds, the noble actions, of

the Greeks and Romans or modern Italians, that has

rescued these names from the effacing daub of obli-

vion ; if it had not been for their poets, their his-

torians, their philosophers, their heroes would in vain

have struggled for fame. Their actions would have



!

LETTER TO FRANCES POLIDORI 211

been recorded in the dusty legends of monks, and

consequently have been forgotten, like those of the

Belgians, Carthaginians, and others. How many fine

actions of modern times will be buried in oblivion

from the same want, and how many merely secondary

characters will be handed down with a halo round

their deeds reflected from the pages of historic genius

I am very pleased with Lord Byron. I am with

him on the footing of an equal, everything alike : at

present here we have a suite of rooms between us.

I have my sitting-room at one end, he at the other.

He has not shown any passion ; though we have

had nothing but a series of mishaps that have put me
out of temper though they have not ruffled his. The
carriage, the new carriage, has had three stoppages.

We are at present at Brussels merely to have the

carriage-part well looked at and repaired.

The country till here has been one continued flat ;

and, except within this neighbourhood, we have not

seen a rising ground on which to feast our eyes.

Long avenues paved in the middle form the continued

appearance of our roads. The towns are magnificently

old, such as England cannot rival, and the state of

cultivation is much greater than in England : indeed

we have not seen a weed or a foot of waste ground

all our way. The people in the country show no

misery ; the cottages comfortable, whitewashed, large-

14*



—

212 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

windowed, shining with brass utensils internally, and

only having as many heaps of dirt as there are in-

habitants—who certainly throw away all their clean-

liness upon the house, fields, roads, and windows.

But I will not fill my letter with this, as some time

you will either see my Journal in writing or print

Murray having offered me 500 guineas for it through

Lord Byron. L B is going to give me the

manuscript, when done printing, of his new cantos of

Childe Harold}

Have you seen Mrs. Soane and Mr. S ? how
are they? If you see them, remember me to her and

him. I shall write when I have seen the seat of his

hero's glory, mine's disgrace ; no, not disgrace

misfortune. See Mrs. S, and write how she is.

How are you all at home ? Papa, Mamma, Meggy
(have you heard from her?), Charlotte, Bob, Henry,

Eliza, and Mr. Deagostini. Remember me to all, and

to all who enquire about me not merely from curiosity

—telling me in your next whether they exceed the

number o. I am very well, and wrote Mamma from

Ostend.

I remain, my dear Fanny,

Your affect. Brother,

J. POLIDORI.
Brussels, May 2, 1816.

' No doubt this intention was not carried into effect.



LETTER TO HOBHOUSE 213

Write to me—Dr. Polidori, a Geneve, poste restante,

—and soon, as I shall be there in 12 days.

To John Hobhouse, Whitton Park,
NEAR HOUNSLOW.

Coblentz, May 11, 1816.

Dear Sir,

As we are at last some way on our

journey, I take a sheet of paper up, in despair of

filling it, to tell you we are both well and hearty.

Lord Byron's health is greatly improved, his stomach

returning rapidly to its natural state. Exercise and

peace of mind, making great advances towards the

amendment of his corps dilabre, leave little for

medicine to patch up. His spirits, I think, are also

much improved. He blithely carols through the day,

' Here's to you, Tom Brown ' : and, when he has

done, says, ' That's as well as Hobhouse does it.'

You and his other friend, Scrope Davies, form a great

subject of conversation.

God ! here I am at the end of all my thoughts.

Oh no ! Waterloo was ridden over by my Lord on a

Cossack horse, accompanied by myself on a Flemish

steed ; Lord Byron singing Turkish or Arnaout

riding-tunes, and your h s listening.

We had a very good day of it. Lord Byron visited

Howard's (I think. Colonel) burying-place twice.



214 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

We have had two days by preeminence in our

tour—to-day and Waterloo. To-day we came from

Bonn hither through the finest scenes I ever saw,

modern and ancient; the 13th and i8th century

forming an olla podrida with the bases given in the

year i. Towers and towns and castles and cots were

sprinkled on the side of a . . . But here I am on

poetic stilts, cut short for prose ones.

They boast—the Ministerialists and others—of

ours being the happy land. I should like to carry

John Bull to Flanders and the Rhine : happiness,

content, cleanliness (here and there), husbandry,

plenty without luxury, are here bestowed on all.

War has had no effect upon the fields ; and even at

Waterloo no one (except for the glittering button

or less brilliant cuirass in beggar's hand) would

imagine two such myriaded armies had met there.

No sulkiness is seen upon the face here, and no impu-

dence. On the Rhine and in Flanders there are

hardly any beggars. To-day we had nosegays given

us by little girls for centimes. But the other day,

coming to Battice, we met the best beggars : three

little girls, pretty though not well dressed, ran

along our carriage, crying out—" Donnez-nous un

sou. Monsieur le G6n6ral en chef"; and another,

" Chef de bataillon." Having given these some, a

boy followed, pulling faces comic enough to make



;

LETTER TO GAETANO POLIDORI 215

such grave dons laugh, and crying out, " Vivent

Messieurs les Rois des Hanovdriens—donnez-moi
un sou."

As I fear I have tried your eyes, and lost my
pains after all on account of the illegibility of my
accursed pen's scratches, I must end—assuring you
at the same time I am with esteem

Yours etc.,

J. POLIDORI.

We count upon being at Geneva in ten days at

best. Excuse the bad writing etc., for I am in a

fever of digestion after my ride.—J. P.

To Gaetano Polidori.

September 20, 1816.

My dear Father,
You judged right with regard to my

writing. I had written twice since your letter

announcing The Pamphleteer, and was anxiously

waiting yours. Your letter gave me pleasure

and I was indeed in want of some just then, for

I was in agitation for my parting from Lord

Byron. We have parted, finding that our tempers

did not agree. He proposed it, and it was settled.

There was no immediate cause, but a continued

series of slight quarrels. I believe the fault, if any.



2i6 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

has been on my part ; I am not accustomed to have

a master, and therefore my conduct was not free and

easy. I found on settling accounts that I had 70
napoleons ; I therefore determined to walk over

Italy, and (seeing the medical establishments) see if

there proves a good opportunity to settle myself, so

that I hope I am still off your hands for nine

months : perhaps Lady Westmorland, who is at

Rome, is desirous of having an English physician

for longer, I having a letter for her from Mme. de

Stael. I shall write to-day to Vacca and Zio 

for letters to Milan to physicians, in your name; and
at present, till I think they and my trunks can have

arrived, will wander amongst the Alps,—in which
course I am now at Thun, almost in the centre. I

have seen Mont Blanc and its glaciers, and will see

the Jungfrau, Grindelwald, and Grimsel. Then I

will go by the Simplon to Milan, whither direct to

me poste-restante, only putting my Giovanni etc.

names in full, as there are Polidoris there.^ I am
in good health and spirits ; I hope this won't hurt

yours, for assure yourself I will do all I can not

to allow you to feel any inconvenience on my
account.

Remember me to my mother, who I know will

' These Polidoris were not (so far as I know) members of the
same family as John Polidori.



LETTER TO GAETANO POLIDORI 217

feel deeply this disappointment ; to Mary,^ Fanny,
and Charlotte, to Signor Deagostini and Signor De
Ocheda, and to all.

If you could get me letters of introduction, they

would be of great use. In the meanwhile, my dear

father, believe me
Your affectionate son,

John Polidori.

John Polidori to Gaetano Polidori—
Translation.

Arezzo, November 14, 1816.

Dear Father,
I fear you must be in much anxiety at not

having heard from me for so long ; but the reason

was that I did not wish to write before having seen

my uncle—to whom I went the day before yesterday,

and who received me with great affection and pleasure.

I wrote to him from Thun. Thence I went to

Grindelwald and Lauterbrunner ; thence to Inter-

lachcn, and, by the Lake of Brientz, to Meyringen ; by
the Grimsel in the Valais to Obergasteln ; thence to

Brieg ; and then by the Simplon down to Farinoli

in the Borromean Islands. Thence I embarked to

Sestri Calende ; thence to Milan—where, meeting the

' This was Dr. Polidori's elder sister, Maria Margaret, who
in my time was invariably called " Margaret " in the family.



2i8 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

poet Monti, Lord Byron, Monsignor de Breme, and

others of my acquaintance, I remained some weeks.

Thence I went to Florence, by Bologna, Modena,

Parma, and Piacenza, and crossing the Apennines. In

Florence I stayed two days, and saw Cavalier

Pontelli, Abate Fontani, Dr. Frosini, and others.

Thence I went on foot to Arezzo, where I found my
uncle, my aunt, Pippo, and Teresa, all well ; and they

received me with great cordiality into their house,

where I now am.

Seeing, by your letter to my uncle, in how much
trouble you are on my account, I have determined,

after learning whether Lady Westmorland will employ

me or no—if yes, to go to Rome ; if no, to go straight

from Leghorn to London, to the bosom of my family.

I shall soon hear from Lady Westmorland, as Lady
Jersey undertook, at the instance of Monsignor de

Breme, to ask her mother whether she wants me or

not, and she is now in Florence, en route for Rome.
In case she should tell me yes, I shall at once go to

Rome : but meanwhile I don't proceed any farther

than Arezzo. If she says no, I shall be off to Leghorn,

and return to London.

I wish that in your next letter you would send me
enough money, in a bill on Florence, for paying the

passage from Leghorn to London, for the chance of

my not having enough remaining. . . .



! —
LETTERS 3i9>

When I see you again I shall have much to tell you
about, but will not put it into a letter. Suffice it that

I have found that what you told me about Italy is

but too true. I am in good health. . . .

Your affectionate son,

John Polidori.



I became indignant at some references  to the strange conduct of that Lord
with whom he was travelling : but he kept his temper

well—I envy him for that. All these people are hard :

Saevus enim ferme sensus communis in illi fortuna.

—Patience





220 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

Harrow, April 20, 1835.

Courteous Signor Rossetti,

Thank you so much for your amiable reply,

and the interest you show in the undertaking of a

pen but too unworthy of those great names which give

so much lustre to your country. Meanwhile I am
about to make a farther request : but am afraid of

showing myself troublesome, and beg you to tell me
your opinion sincerely. I should not like to seem to

take impertinent liberties ; and, if my idea appears

to you impracticable, don't say anything about it

to any one.

I am informed that your Father-in-law the cele-

brated Polidori can relate many interesting circum-

stances regarding Alfieri. The Life which 1 am writing

will be printed in Dr. Lardner's Cyclopcedia : therefore

it is very short, running perhaps to 70 pages—not

more. Thus, if I could introduce some details not yet

known but worthy of publication, I should be very

pleased indeed. I don't know whether Polidori would

be willing to give me such details. For example,

I should like to know whether Alfieri was really so

melancholy and taciturn as is said by Sir John
Hobhouse in his work. Illustrations to the Fourth Canto

of Childe Harold; whether he gave signs of attach-

ment to his friends, and whether he was warmly



LETTER FROM MRS. SHELLEY 221

loved by them in return. Some anecdotes would be

welcomed by me; also some information about the

Countess of Albany. There is an affectation of

silence, as to all that relates to her, in whatever

has yet been written concerning Alfieri. But, now
that she is dead, this is no longer necessary. Were
they married? If not, nothing need be said about

it; but, if they were, it would be well to afiSrm as

much.

I shall be in London next Sunday, and shall be

staying there several days. ^ But I am in a quarter

so distant from yours (7 Upper Eaton Street, Gros-

venor Place) that it would be indiscreet to ask for a

visit from you—and much more indiscreet to say

that, if Signor Polidori would visit me, he could

perhaps tell me some little things more easily than

by writing. As the Tuscans say, " Lascio far a ^
lei."

You will do whatever is most fitting, and will give

me a reply at your convenience.

Repeating the thanks so much due to your kind-

ness, believe me
Your much obliged servant,

M. W, P. Shelley.

I hear that Alfieri was intimate with Guiccioli of

Ravenna, the latter being then quite young ; and

^ " I leave the question to you."



222 THE DIARY OF POLIDORI

they had a joint idea and project (which did not turn

out manageable) of establishing a national theatre

in Italy. Possibly Signer Polidori knows about this.

Is there any historical work containing particulars

about the closing years of the royal husband of the

Countess of Albany ? I don't know, and am in the

dark. He (is it not so ?) was the last of the Stuarts,

except his brother the Cardinal of York.

Oh what trouble I am giving you to reply ! Really

I now feel more than ashamed of it. But you are

so kind. And, besides, the grammar of this letter

must be like Alfieri's Cleopatra.



